[Amit Varma]: We sometimes think of the economy as something removed from the real world.
[Amit Varma]: There's numbers and graphs and tables and data, all things for policy wonks to look
[Amit Varma]: at or rich people with advisors.
[Amit Varma]: But what does it have to do with our daily life?
[Amit Varma]: Well, everything.
[Amit Varma]: One of the common themes on my show is that economics has human consequences.
[Amit Varma]: Bad economic policy in a country like India can affect the lives of millions of people.
[Amit Varma]: One reason I often say that some of Indira Gandhi's economic policies or Narendra Modi's
[Amit Varma]: demonetization were crimes on humanity.
[Amit Varma]: They hurt the poor the most.
[Amit Varma]: The thing is, bad policy is often couched in good intentions, and the bad outcomes they
[Amit Varma]: result in are often delayed, and the causation is often not obvious.
[Amit Varma]: We need to talk more about economics so that people don't get fooled by lofty narrative
[Amit Varma]: and can figure out when they are being had.
[Amit Varma]: That's one reason I started The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: The title of the show is inspired by Frederick Barcia's famous essay, That Which is Seen
[Amit Varma]: and That Which is Not Seen.
[Amit Varma]: I thought I'd examine the seen intentions and unseen outcomes of public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, the show has evolved to be much, much more than that.
[Amit Varma]: I now do deep dive conversations, studying to examine not just economics, but also politics,
[Amit Varma]: society and even the human condition.
[Amit Varma]: That said, economics is at the end of the day, the study of human behavior under conditions
[Amit Varma]: of scarcity.
[Amit Varma]: And so here I am, doing something I do every few months, taking stock of the Indian economy.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badman.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a formidable economist, Ela Patnaik.
[Amit Varma]: If there's one economic commentator whose body of work reveals a journey of the Indian
[Amit Varma]: economy in the last 30 years, it's Ela.
[Amit Varma]: A child of Marxist parents, Ela studied at JNU in the 1980s, but was encouraged by her
[Amit Varma]: parents to think through the world for herself.
[Amit Varma]: She went to do a PhD in England in the early 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And just as India changed with liberalization, Ela swept aside the received dogmas of her
[Amit Varma]: Indian education and discovered the wonders of an open economy.
[Amit Varma]: She talks a fair bit about this fascinating journey in our conversation today, and also
[Amit Varma]: of how for so many years she swam against the tide, both in economic policymaking and
[Amit Varma]: in the public discourse.
[Amit Varma]: Ela is a professor at the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy, NIPFP, and has
[Amit Varma]: worked at many senior levels in Indian policymaking, including as a principal economic advisor
[Amit Varma]: to the government of India.
[Amit Varma]: A mutual friend described her as an economist who brought macroeconomic thinking to India,
[Amit Varma]: and she was one of the driving forces behind the RBI's inflation targeting.
[Amit Varma]: If that sounds boring, it isn't.
[Amit Varma]: Ela's also enlightened millions of people with her columns and her work on television,
[Amit Varma]: and is now a bonafide econ superstar on YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: She does a bunch of shows for the print, including one called Ela-nomics, I'll link it from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes.
[Amit Varma]: We not only discuss the road that she has traveled here, but also India's hesitant journey,
[Amit Varma]: especially when it comes to economic reforms, where most of our governments since 1991 have
[Amit Varma]: failed us, including this one.
[Amit Varma]: There isn't a simple narrative that explains this, and what has gone wrong is not the fault
[Amit Varma]: of one party alone.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian economy has been going down, down, down for over a decade now, when Pranab Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: took over at the Finance Ministry and set us on the road to ruin, a road that Narendra
[Amit Varma]: Modi's government seemed to gleefully embrace.
[Amit Varma]: But if the decade leading up to 2020 was bad, the year since then has been worse because
[Amit Varma]: of COVID.
[Amit Varma]: Ela and I take it step by step, discussing our broad journey after 1991, zooming into
[Amit Varma]: the last 10 years, and then zooming in further to the impact of COVID and looking ahead.
[Amit Varma]: Like so many of my episodes, by the way, this feels like the latest installment in an ongoing
[Amit Varma]: conversation on the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I've linked earlier episodes on the economy in the show notes, as also important episodes
[Amit Varma]: with Pooja Mehra, Ajay Shah and Karthik Muralitharan.
[Amit Varma]: Do you remember the argument Karthik and I had in our healthcare episode, episode 225
[Amit Varma]: about the high taxes on petrol?
[Amit Varma]: I feel they're horrendous, Karthik disagrees, and I got a chance to ask Ela for her views
[Amit Varma]: on that.
[Amit Varma]: Guess whose side she came down on, bloat, bloat.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, time now for the conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But before we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Over the last year, I've enjoyed teaching my online course, The Art of Clear Writing,
[Amit Varma]: and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction that offers much stimulation and even some comfort in these difficult times.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, and a lovely and lively community at the end
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs Rs 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and the June classes begin on June 5th.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Hello, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: Hi, Amit.
[Guest]: How are you?
[Amit Varma]: I'm good.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that very question, how are you, you know, takes on kind of so much significance
[Amit Varma]: in these times, because every day there is sort of some harrowing news from somewhere
[Amit Varma]: or the other.
[Amit Varma]: How are you?
[Amit Varma]: How have the last few months been for you?
[Guest]: Hunkered down, staying at home or work from home.
[Guest]: We've just been fortunate that nobody very, very close has been ill or we've not lost
[Guest]: somebody as in the immediate family, though, you know, these are difficult times.
[Guest]: Every day we lose friends and family members in the extended family.
[Amit Varma]: But now for the last few days, it's been a little bit better.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about your early life.
[Amit Varma]: Like I'm guessing you're a 70s and 80s kid.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're just a little older than me.
[Amit Varma]: You went to college in the 1980s, Hindu College, then JNU, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about what those years were like growing up.
[Amit Varma]: Like what kind of kid were you?
[Amit Varma]: What drew you towards the sort of things that you studied?
[Amit Varma]: And in general, what were the influences around you?
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things I realized while talking to guests who grew up around that
[Amit Varma]: time or are of that age is that, you know, young people today have all the influences
[Amit Varma]: of the world open to them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the whole world is at their fingertips through the Internet and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But back in the day, growing up in the 70s, 80s, even 90s, we got, you know, little driblets
[Amit Varma]: of influences from here and there.
[Amit Varma]: So whatever got through to us was, you know, likely to play a big part in shaping us.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of that landscape of your growing up in the, you know, when you did.
[Guest]: So my parents were both professors at JNU.
[Guest]: And that is, at least at that time, even more so was a place where there was always a lot
[Guest]: of intellectual debate.
[Guest]: There's always debate about issues, what's happening in the world.
[Guest]: And you know, I was a science student till class 12.
[Guest]: And I thought I would do science because I'd got the NTS.
[Guest]: And you know, it was like, wow, at that time, it was very, a big achievement at that time,
[Guest]: certainly.
[Guest]: I was planning all the way to maybe take the JNU or something and then changed my mind
[Guest]: because the kind of debates that we would have at home and with, you know, various.
[Guest]: So my mothers and fathers, students and colleagues would always be dropping in.
[Guest]: And, you know, there was always a lively debate.
[Guest]: And I think that's what attracted me to economics that, you know, this is something I want to
[Guest]: understand more deeply.
[Guest]: And then instead of taking the JEE, I went and joined, I just applied for economics,
[Guest]: actually.
[Guest]: Only that.
[Amit Varma]: Incredible.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about your parents.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about the kind of debates you had at home, for example.
[Guest]: There would be debates about what were the reasons for whatever was happening on the
[Guest]: political scene.
[Guest]: And usually it would be traced back to economics.
[Guest]: And my parents were both Marxists, you know, JNU was, there was a lot of Marxism in JNU
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: So my parents were like everybody else in JNU, quite leftist.
[Guest]: And they would trace almost everything that happened in history.
[Guest]: My mother was a professor of philosophy and my father of African studies, African politics.
[Guest]: So everything would get traced back to economics.
[Guest]: And I mean, that's basically Marxism that it is that the economy is the base and the
[Guest]: rest of the superstructure.
[Guest]: So it would go back to that.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't, you know, perhaps stick to many of those kind of beliefs, which I
[Guest]: think were far more rigid than they should have been.
[Guest]: But in terms of trying to understand the world, that was my beginning.
[Guest]: That was the place from where I started.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess initially there must have then been an attraction to Marxism itself, because
[Amit Varma]: I think the attraction to all big ideas is that, hey, this explains the world so well.
[Amit Varma]: And that's why you were attracted to it.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a trap there that then you can try to explain everything through that.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that attraction like?
[Amit Varma]: And how did you kind of get past it?
[Amit Varma]: Like, when did you begin to get past it and rebel as it were against your parents beliefs?
[Guest]: Only after I was only after I finished my master's.
[Guest]: So while I was in college, while I was at university, anyway, you know, you think of
[Guest]: the influences at that time, the friends you have, everybody around you and at home.
[Guest]: So those were very, very, I should say, dominant influences, both because of social circles,
[Guest]: as well as the general atmosphere.
[Guest]: So I did my master's at the Center for Economic Studies and Planning where, you know, we had
[Guest]: Prabhat Patnaik, Utsav Patnaik, now later Jayati Ghosh was my MPhil advisor.
[Guest]: But you know, towards the end of my master's and beginning of my MPhil, which I did my
[Guest]: MPhil in JNU.
[Guest]: So that time I started, you know, questioning too many things.
[Guest]: So I think I'm not a person who can belong to any political party because what that requires
[Guest]: is agreeing with 100% of everything they say.
[Guest]: So you know, regardless of which the party is, every party member is expected to, you
[Guest]: know, carry forward the party line.
[Guest]: So that really didn't suit me as I questioned too many things.
[Guest]: So I think that's when it became clear that no, this is not where my future lies.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, what you just said about, you know, that need for purity, we see it more and more
[Amit Varma]: in social media these days where, you know, you have different echo chambers forming and
[Amit Varma]: stringent enforcements of, you know, purity.
[Amit Varma]: And like I always say that, you know, whenever I go on Twitter or whatever, and you see labels
[Amit Varma]: thrown about like socialist or libertarian or this or that, and I think all labels are
[Amit Varma]: fundamentally toxic because all labels are limiting in a particular sense.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost as if like 90% of the time, those labels are used on social media.
[Amit Varma]: It's as if you're trying to put someone in a category of us or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And that just makes the whole discourse very toxic.
[Amit Varma]: But to kind of get back to, you know, your sort of intellectual evolution during those
[Amit Varma]: times, were there any sort of aha moments during that phase, like, of course, there
[Amit Varma]: are these little pinpricks of questionings when you're saying, wait a minute, you're
[Amit Varma]: saying this, and this doesn't seem quite right, it's surely more nuanced.
[Amit Varma]: And I get that.
[Amit Varma]: But were there sort of any aha moments when you look at things differently?
[Amit Varma]: Any books that kind of influenced you that way?
[Guest]: So I remember one moment, which was when, you know, some of the, there was some meeting
[Guest]: going on, and some of the leftist, leading leftist leaders were opposing infrastructure
[Guest]: development in Delhi, saying, oh, you're building these big roads and highways, and there are
[Guest]: people starving.
[Guest]: And, you know, I stood up from wherever I was, I was maybe 19, 18, 19 or something.
[Guest]: And I stood up and said, no, no, we need the roads, I stood up from the audience, and this
[Guest]: person was on stage.
[Guest]: And I said, no, we need the roads, we, you know, that's how GDP will grow.
[Guest]: You are not going to remove poverty without GDP growth.
[Guest]: So you have to have infrastructure.
[Guest]: And everybody was stunned, because, you know, that was not something that people said at
[Guest]: that time.
[Guest]: So this is in the early 80s.
[Guest]: And it was almost as if anything Western is bad, any modernization, any infrastructure
[Guest]: development, which is, you know, these big flyovers, why are you spending money on flyovers?
[Guest]: I don't remember too many other incidents, but that was one that like kind of hit me
[Guest]: that no, no, no, this is completely wrong.
[Guest]: This is not what it should be.
[Amit Varma]: And it also speaks to like a fundamental mindset that we've kind of had, and we still in many
[Amit Varma]: ways have, which is a very intuitive mindset of seeing the world as a zero-sum place, right?
[Amit Varma]: That if you're spending on roads, you know, you should be spending the poor instead, as
[Amit Varma]: if there is a fixed pie.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, that whole zero-sum mindset plays into everything.
[Amit Varma]: It plays into when you talk about redistribution vis-a-vis growth, it plays into practically
[Amit Varma]: everything that we do.
[Amit Varma]: And in some cases, it needs to because the government does have a limited sum of money
[Amit Varma]: and there are opportunity costs and all of that, of course, is there.
[Amit Varma]: But as far as the economy is concerned, it's dangerous to think of it that way.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I've often seen, like when I kind of grew up in the 80s, you know, I kind of
[Amit Varma]: imbibed all the typical conventional wisdom, which involves this kind of zero-sum thinking
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: And it's natural to do that, one, because of course, the environment around me was that
[Amit Varma]: kind of proto-socialist environment, my, you know, my dad was an IAS officer, and it was
[Amit Varma]: just natural to believe in the power of the state and not think of the fatal conceit as
[Amit Varma]: it were.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of the truths about the world are deeply counterintuitive, that things are not
[Amit Varma]: zero-sum, that the economy is a positive something, that there is something called spontaneous
[Amit Varma]: order that sometimes you, you know, the government can achieve things not by trying to control
[Amit Varma]: it from the top down, but by just enabling society to solve its own problems.
[Amit Varma]: But these are very counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: So over a period of time when, you know, what was that kind of process like when you try
[Amit Varma]: to figure this stuff out?
[Amit Varma]: Were there particular books, were there thinkers who influenced you?
[Amit Varma]: Take me through a little bit of that intellectual evolution that you must have gone through.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess some of it would be academics, but some of it would also be outside academics,
[Amit Varma]: just looking at things around you as it were.
[Guest]: Yes, so two things really.
[Guest]: One in terms of being in JNU and with people here, I felt very uncomfortable when I was
[Guest]: told what to think.
[Guest]: I mean, being told what to say is something else, but I've been fortunate that my mother
[Guest]: was a PhD in philosophy and a professor of philosophy.
[Guest]: And I had been taught to question, question, question, question, question from, you know,
[Guest]: from the day I was born, I was taught to question.
[Guest]: And so I became quite uncomfortable when I was told to accept things because I was being
[Guest]: told something.
[Guest]: And so that was one, you know, in terms of the environment, that was the one thing that
[Guest]: I rebelled against.
[Guest]: And I find myself very uncomfortable in situations when people tell me what to think.
[Guest]: But I think the second was going for my PhD to a completely different system.
[Guest]: So I went to the UK for my PhD.
[Guest]: I got this Commonwealth Nehru Centenary Fellowship, which after JNU, which was a big, big change.
[Guest]: So the things that one learned, the things one saw, my PhD advisor, everything, you know,
[Guest]: helped in making me think very, very differently.
[Guest]: So I should say I came back a very different person, in my mind, I came back different,
[Guest]: thought differently, completely.
[Amit Varma]: And how did your parents react to that?
[Amit Varma]: The fact that, you know, you're no longer the obedient little Marxist girl, but you've
[Amit Varma]: become something else.
[Guest]: No, they were okay with it.
[Guest]: I mean, the way that, you know, the fundamental principle was that you have to think for yourself,
[Guest]: not for my parents.
[Guest]: So, you know, for the others, it might be different, but for my parents, it was that
[Guest]: you have to think for yourself.
[Guest]: And no matter what you think, whether you agree or you disagree, the most important
[Guest]: thing is that you think for yourself and not say or do things that you're told to do.
[Guest]: In fact, my father, right from my childhood, discouraged me to join the bureaucracy.
[Guest]: So he said, no, this is not something for you because, you know, you question too much.
[Guest]: I was perhaps the only one in my master's class who did not take the UPSC exam because
[Guest]: at that time there weren't many jobs around.
[Guest]: So almost everybody was taking these competitive exams.
[Guest]: But, you know, my father was, no, you have to think for yourself and this is not something
[Guest]: you can do if you are part of a bureaucracy, which I understand very well.
[Guest]: So yes, they were fine with it.
[Amit Varma]: That's wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: It strikes me that every good economist is not just shaped by the study of economics,
[Amit Varma]: but also whatever other influences they're kind of exposed to.
[Amit Varma]: And on the one hand, you have like your mom is a professor of philosophy, you're questioning
[Amit Varma]: things like you said, too, I would imagine that, you know, because we had these political
[Amit Varma]: discussions at home and so on and so forth, there would also have been a very keen focus
[Amit Varma]: in your mind on the intersection of economics in the real world.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just something that you're studying, it's something that actually affects lives
[Amit Varma]: like in that early example of, you know, fighting for roads.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, if you were to then look at that, what are the different kinds of things that
[Amit Varma]: shape the economist you are apart from the economics, like part of it would, I'm guessing,
[Amit Varma]: be the politics, was there reading that went into it?
[Amit Varma]: You know, give me a sort of a fuller sense of yourself, if I may ask.
[Guest]: One of the most important things, apart from, you know, reading books and things which naturally
[Guest]: you can imagine, you know, being in a house surrounded by books, one did that.
[Guest]: But I think one of the very important things was this daily reading of newspapers from
[Guest]: childhood.
[Guest]: And I think many people don't perhaps do that.
[Guest]: And so maybe they're not so connected with the world and with the country.
[Guest]: But if you're doing that every day, and if you're sitting around, you know, the dinner
[Guest]: table talking about what happened and why it happened, and you're doing that at breakfast,
[Guest]: you're doing that at dinner.
[Guest]: So you know, you do that day after day.
[Guest]: I think that really makes a difference to who you are and what you want to do.
[Guest]: So if you know, you kind of get into that, that I don't just want to interpret the world,
[Guest]: I want to change it, but not necessarily by a communist revolution.
[Guest]: But it just goes in so deep that when you see problems, so you know, when you grow up,
[Guest]: you want to like, for me, I've always worked on last 20 years, 25 years, my entire working
[Guest]: life as an economist has been working on real problems that are there in the economy, and
[Guest]: not on something, you know, abstract or something very far away.
[Guest]: So it's been working on those problems, and then trying to work towards solutions wherever
[Guest]: one could find those and working towards that.
[Guest]: And I think that's the influence really.
[Amit Varma]: And were the newspapers you read English newspapers?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So we used to get let me let me ask you a question not quite related to economics, but
[Amit Varma]: it's come up on my show before and it came up recently, like one of my friends recently
[Amit Varma]: posted on Twitter, where he kind of lamented that we are such a divided nation today.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't remember us being so divided in the 80s and the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and my point there was that no, we were always divided, we were just in
[Amit Varma]: a bubble and the bubble wasn't divided, but we were in a bubble where we didn't kind of
[Amit Varma]: see the rest of the country.
[Amit Varma]: And I've had guests on the show before, like Akshay Mukul, who wrote the book on the Gita
[Amit Varma]: Press and the political scientist, Rahul Verma.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the interesting points I got while talking to them was that growing up they read
[Amit Varma]: newspapers in Hindi, and, you know, other guests have read newspapers in their languages.
[Amit Varma]: And their contention was that because they were not just reading, you know, English newspapers,
[Amit Varma]: they could see outside the elite bubble, they got a sense of what the other India as it
[Amit Varma]: were, was also like to them.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this upsurge of Hindutva is not an aberration, but you know, it was always there,
[Amit Varma]: it was always kind of coming up.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't want to ask you about the politics in particular.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, even I grew up in a similar elite bubble to yours, I'm guessing where
[Amit Varma]: you're just reading everything in English, and you're mixing with a certain kind of people
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And at what point does one sort of get awareness of that bubble and be able to actually see
[Amit Varma]: outside like not in a sense of intellectually knowing that, yeah, you know, there are, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there's a world out there that is different, but, you know, actually in terms of getting
[Amit Varma]: it engaging with it.
[Guest]: I think I was fortunate because my parents, being communists, they would be people who
[Guest]: would be coming straight from villages, so they were not like they were not leaders,
[Guest]: they were not active, but just, you know, the fact that they were JNU professors, people
[Guest]: would come to them, meet them.
[Guest]: Many of my father's students would, you know, couldn't speak a word of English, would be
[Guest]: right straight from a village.
[Guest]: We also had a, there was a reservation system in JNU.
[Guest]: So that encouraged, they used to give points for coming from a backward region, from a
[Guest]: lower income category, and the rest.
[Guest]: And that would encourage a lot of people to come.
[Guest]: So I think that I was fortunate that I wasn't, I mean, of course, English newspapers were
[Guest]: something that, you know, you read what you get at home.
[Guest]: We used to get, I think, one Hindi Jan Satta or something, Hindi paper on Sundays.
[Guest]: But you know, you and I didn't have a choice.
[Guest]: We were born into the family, we were born in and we read the papers that our parents
[Guest]: bought.
[Guest]: But, you know, I was fortunate in that sense that there was a mix of people and a lot of
[Guest]: them not elite coming from backgrounds, which and my mother particularly used to, you know,
[Guest]: encourage them to come home to her students when they came from backgrounds where they
[Guest]: had huge gaps also in their learning.
[Guest]: So they would be sitting and, you know, working with her and studying.
[Guest]: So I was fortunate not to, you know, be in a complete bubble and to be able to interact
[Guest]: with people from all over the country and from different backgrounds.
[Amit Varma]: And how did your conception of yourself during these years kind of evolve like for a lot
[Amit Varma]: of people, certainly for me, it's very shaky early on.
[Amit Varma]: It takes many years to get to somewhere where you can kind of begin to think of yourself
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: These are the things I want to do.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a place I want to occupy in the world and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And yet it seems just looking at your bare biographical details where you do your BA
[Amit Varma]: in economics from Hindu and then your MA and your MPhil from JNU and then you go to the
[Amit Varma]: University of Surrey and you do your PhD and then you come back here.
[Amit Varma]: And just looking at the bare bones of that, it seems that okay, you kind of got it figured
[Amit Varma]: out that you want to learn economics the best you can.
[Amit Varma]: And then you want to kind of work within India and try to actually make a difference in the
[Amit Varma]: real world.
[Amit Varma]: Was it always kind of like that?
[Amit Varma]: Or did your conception of self evolve?
[Amit Varma]: Like at what point did it firm up and what is that conception of self in a sense?
[Guest]: Well, to begin with, what is that conception?
[Guest]: It is that I try to do what I can, I try to understand what I can.
[Guest]: And as I said, one has been, I guess, brought up in a way that it's almost as if every problem
[Guest]: is one's own responsibility.
[Guest]: So if you see a problem, you don't ignore it.
[Guest]: You study it, you understand it and you see if there is a way out.
[Guest]: And in economic policy, there are so many problems.
[Guest]: And particularly when one is coming from a background where, as a country, when we are
[Guest]: coming from a background where we had almost stopped people from doing anything, there
[Guest]: were so many restrictions, then it's a great place to study economics and understand what's
[Guest]: going on.
[Guest]: Because you see where the restrictions are removed, what happens and when they are not,
[Guest]: then what happens.
[Guest]: And then it's also if you are in that space where, so I always wanted to write and I started
[Guest]: writing right after my PhD and once I started working on the Indian economy.
[Guest]: So you are in a place where you can study it and at least, the least one can do is write
[Guest]: about those issues and help everybody understand your point of view.
[Guest]: So I'm not in the bureaucracy or a politician who can actually be the ones who decide that
[Guest]: change happens.
[Guest]: But it happens because of ideas, because one writes and people listen and read and if one
[Guest]: is able to speak in a language that is simple and convey what one thinks, then people get
[Guest]: convinced and you know, then that's what makes life meaningful.
[Amit Varma]: And how important is that role as a public intellectual in the sense that you are an
[Amit Varma]: economist at the same time, you're someone who has worked with the government at different
[Amit Varma]: times as an advisor and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, you've written prolifically, you've done forays into audiovisual, you know,
[Amit Varma]: for example, you had policy with Patnaik, your show for NDTV more than a decade ago
[Amit Varma]: and now you do Elonomics and you know, the other stuff that you do for the print, like
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people will write a lot because it kind of helps them in their thinking process
[Amit Varma]: that you know, as they write, they learn more about a subject and it's something they want
[Amit Varma]: to do.
[Amit Varma]: And another way of looking at it is that look, if I want to make a difference, that difference
[Amit Varma]: also comes from getting these ideas out there in the discourse.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the issues with this, I'm guessing for you would have been that the discourse
[Amit Varma]: is kind of stunted.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, some of the things that you say at different points in time, and certainly
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine it would be the case in the 90s, are just not out there, right?
[Amit Varma]: So what has this process been for you?
[Amit Varma]: Like, do you do you see it as, you know, part of your duty almost to do this stuff, to have
[Guest]: this public facing face as well?
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: So I get a stomachache if I don't say what I am thinking, if I don't write.
[Guest]: So I've always, you know, been writing, I used to have a column in the Business Standard
[Guest]: and the Indian Express and, you know, apart from the TV show and the print column that
[Guest]: I'm doing now.
[Guest]: So it's almost, it's a part of me.
[Guest]: I mean, now I've done it for so long.
[Guest]: I started writing my columns in 99.
[Guest]: So it's just been, you know, too many years for me to even think of myself as separate
[Unknown]: from that.
[Guest]: It was very painful during when I was in government, I was told not to write, I had to stop writing.
[Guest]: So for a year and a half, of course, they kept me so busy that it didn't, you know,
[Guest]: hurt too much.
[Guest]: And some of the things I was doing was what I had been writing about.
[Guest]: So it didn't hurt that much.
[Guest]: But yeah, it's very difficult to be somebody who doesn't, isn't thinking, isn't worrying,
[Guest]: isn't talking, isn't trying to convince, isn't trying to help other people to understand.
[Guest]: So it's very much completely a part of me.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm just fortunate that I'm in a situation where I have the freedom to do so, where I'm
[Guest]: able to do so, where I have the time and the luxury because, you know, many jobs don't
[Guest]: even give you the time to do that.
[Guest]: So fortunately, you know, we are able to do that.
[Guest]: So it's a good place to be in.
[Amit Varma]: And for people who care about ideas, I guess, especially people who engage deeply with policy
[Amit Varma]: like you do, I guess there is a sort of a dual imperative, which for many people is
[Amit Varma]: an either or where on the one hand, when you look at the political marketplace, what you're
[Amit Varma]: saying is that I want to be able to influence the decision makers to make the right decisions.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you're looking at the demand end of the political marketplace and
[Amit Varma]: saying that I want to get my ideas out in the public domain, where you know, they can
[Amit Varma]: hopefully change the discourse and then the change at the top can happen later.
[Amit Varma]: And you're someone who's kind of been trying to do this simultaneously.
[Amit Varma]: And I would just imagine thinking aloud, that this then almost creates two contradictory
[Amit Varma]: pressures that when you're working with policy makers, and when you're working with government,
[Amit Varma]: you have to moderate your ideas, you have to talk about incremental steps go one step
[Amit Varma]: at a time.
[Amit Varma]: But when you're trying to get your ideas out into the public domain, there is perhaps the
[Amit Varma]: urge to kind of just lay it all out as it is, because you know, why that urge to moderation?
[Amit Varma]: Why not move that Overton window as it were?
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that you've thought about?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it that you've managed to reconcile these easily?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So usually I end up saying things many years before the world is ready to hear them.
[Guest]: So you know, things like inflation targeting, which I started writing about in 2006.
[Guest]: And then finally, it happened in 2016.
[Guest]: So and there are many such examples, you know, talking about business cycles, microstabilization,
[Guest]: many, many, most of my work.
[Guest]: So you know, when nobody listens, and it's okay, you get a bit disappointed, you get
[Guest]: but that's life, you know, and if you obsess on it, and you go on for some time, and then
[Guest]: you realize, okay, nobody's listening.
[Guest]: So you step back and you say, okay, let me write about something that people talk about.
[Guest]: But then every once in a while, you get an opportunity, you know, there's a peg, and
[Guest]: you get an opportunity and you write about some of the things that are dearest to you.
[Guest]: But you know, there's not that much of a contradiction and conflict that I feel because most of the
[Guest]: time, one is able to interpret and understand things because of a understanding of the larger
[Guest]: picture.
[Guest]: And then you write and talk about those.
[Guest]: So when let's say there is a capital control that is imposed, which is completely arbitrary
[Guest]: and which you know is going to hurt, you know, these things keep happening.
[Guest]: So in a sense, policymakers are constantly for the last 20 years, giving me opportunities
[Guest]: week after week, to be able to say something.
[Guest]: So which come out of that broader understanding.
[Guest]: So there's not that much of a conflict, it gives me, you know, little things give me
[Guest]: opportunities to put my ideas across.
[Amit Varma]: So when you came back to India after doing your PhD, what was your thinking?
[Amit Varma]: What was the kind of work that you wanted to do? because one would imagine that for
[Amit Varma]: many people, a natural progression then is to just become an academic outside somewhere
[Amit Varma]: and kind of chill and live a charmed life and do papers and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you actually came back.
[Amit Varma]: So what was your thinking?
[Amit Varma]: What did you want to do?
[Amit Varma]: Were you were you kind of clear about the path ahead?
[Guest]: And is that more or less the path that you've taken?
[Guest]: Pretty much, pretty much.
[Guest]: So I wanted not to be teaching because when I was teaching before I left, I was teaching
[Guest]: at Stephens and it was, you know, it was a heavy workload.
[Guest]: And one didn't really get time to do research.
[Guest]: And I wanted to do research after my PhD and not teach because, you know, there they may
[Guest]: still be an environment where you get a lot of time off.
[Guest]: But here, at least, you know, it's very difficult.
[Guest]: So I wanted to work for a think tank.
[Guest]: And I joined in CAER, National Council of Applied Economic Research.
[Guest]: And I got to work on the Indian economy, which for me was just what I wanted to do.
[Guest]: My PhD had been on a closed economy model because when I had left India and all the
[Guest]: experience one had was closed economy.
[Guest]: So I'd gone in 91 for my PhD.
[Guest]: And by 96, it was an open economy.
[Guest]: So though my PhD was on a closed economy model, it was an endogenous growth model.
[Guest]: But I had been teaching there in Surrey and then learnt open economy macro while teaching
[Guest]: because that's what macro teaching there was.
[Guest]: It was all open economy.
[Guest]: So here, when I came back, I think it was just the perfect thing for me that, you know,
[Guest]: nobody else was particularly studying open economy macro for India in 96.
[Guest]: The economy had barely opened up.
[Guest]: Very few people had actually even been trained in open economy macro.
[Guest]: Macro itself had gone out of fashion.
[Guest]: So, you know, things had been okay in the rest of the world for a while.
[Guest]: And when Indians went to do PhDs abroad, they did development economics, very few did macro.
[Guest]: So it was a complete virgin territory, you know, one could do open economy macro, understand
[Guest]: the Indian economy through the perspective of open economy macro because the economy
[Guest]: was opening up.
[Guest]: And almost all the problems that were arising.
[Guest]: So I had two projects at NCEI, one was on business cycles, and the other was on exchange
[Guest]: rates and interest rates.
[Guest]: So financial markets.
[Guest]: So I was very fortunate to get these two to start working on because this is all three.
[Guest]: I mean, this is really where all the knowledge of everything that I had studied in open economy
[Guest]: macro could be applied.
[Guest]: So I was very fortunate that, you know, I was tooled up, I understood the impossible
[Guest]: trinity, which many people here still hadn't even started reading.
[Guest]: And I was able to apply those and study, you know, the Indian economy from a new perspective.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit more about this impossible trinity.
[Guest]: See, when you're in closed economy, what does a closed economy mean?
[Guest]: You trade, but you don't have capital account openness, you don't allow capital flows.
[Guest]: What are capital flows?
[Guest]: Cross-border flows of money for sale or purchase of assets.
[Guest]: So you don't allow those, you allow trade.
[Guest]: That's the current account.
[Guest]: Your current account is open.
[Guest]: Then what you can do is that you can hike your interest rates as much as you like.
[Guest]: And money may come in, money could have come in if it had been an open economy.
[Guest]: But because you're closed, nothing happens.
[Guest]: You can fix your exchange rate, you can fix your interest rate, so you can have both.
[Guest]: Not that the economy had too many business cycles, they just had monsoon cycles before
[Guest]: 91.
[Guest]: But if you needed to hike interest rates for any reason or lower interest rates for any
[Guest]: reason, you don't have to worry about the effect that that will have on exchange rates.
[Guest]: But now if the economy becomes open, then capital can flow in.
[Guest]: Let's say if interest rates go up in India and capital flows in, then that's going to
[Guest]: appreciate your exchange rate.
[Guest]: If capital flows out, that is going to weaken your currency.
[Guest]: Now the impossible trinity says that these are the three corners of the trinity, an open
[Guest]: capital account, monetary policy independence, that is you determine what your interest rate
[Guest]: is going to be, and exchange rate policy.
[Guest]: So you cannot have all three at the same time.
[Guest]: If you close the capital account, then yes, you can have the other two.
[Guest]: But once the capital account opens, then you can't have those two.
[Guest]: So that's the trinity.
[Amit Varma]: And among sort of economic policy makers in the country, you would imagine that they've
[Amit Varma]: been used to decades of thinking about the economy in a particular way, which is threat
[Amit Varma]: hold, command and control, closed economy, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: Now, through circumstances or whatever, you know, the balance of payments crisis and blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, we've actually opened it up.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, a few people have made some reforms.
[Amit Varma]: But does the mindset shift over time?
[Amit Varma]: Like, one of the things that I think about is that yes, 91 is seminal in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: we opened so much up, but at the same time, you know, it's it's very partial in terms
[Amit Varma]: of what we could have done.
[Amit Varma]: And also what I can't put my finger on is that is there a mindset shift at all?
[Amit Varma]: Because after that initial impetus, it seems to me that inertia sets in again.
[Amit Varma]: And further reforms, you know, sort of slow down.
[Amit Varma]: So in just in terms of the mindset, both within the government and within economists who are
[Amit Varma]: working here, what is you know, how are how are they adapting?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how are they noticing like you pointed out that how it's a delightful time to study
[Amit Varma]: economics because it's almost like these experiments where you had a control and then the control
[Amit Varma]: gets removed and you can see exactly what the consequences and there are so many insights
[Amit Varma]: because there are so many things changing.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, you're a young person who is forming at that moment in time, I would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that everyone who is a major economic commentator at the time or is in government there in the
[Amit Varma]: 40s and 50s, settled ways of thinking, is that an issue when you are in this landscape,
[Amit Varma]: looking around studying these things that really no one in India is studying because
[Amit Varma]: like you said, they're doing development economics and, you know, hunger and nutrition and redistribution
[Amit Varma]: and all that.
[Amit Varma]: What is it like, you know, are you someone who kind of stands apart?
[Guest]: Yeah, very lonely, I would say very difficult and very lonely.
[Guest]: So if I give you a concrete example, when we opened up in 91, after opening up the current
[Guest]: account in about 93-94, we started opening the capital account and we started getting
[Guest]: a lot of FII investment and that meant that the rupee started appreciating and RBI started
[Guest]: buying dollars, they didn't, they just bought dollars, unsterilized, I mean, they just bought
[Guest]: dollars.
[Guest]: So the money supply in the economy increased and they started getting inflation.
[Guest]: So by mid-96 or so, we started getting a lot of inflationary pressures.
[Guest]: But the mindset was that this has nothing to do with opening up or should we allow exchange
[Guest]: rate flexibility, should we not try to fix the exchange rate.
[Guest]: You know, the exchange rate stayed at 31.36 for 16 months after we made it flexible.
[Guest]: So we said now the exchange rate is no longer administered and we are moving to a floating
[Guest]: managed float, but it stayed at 31.36.
[Guest]: Now in those 16 months, RBI was busy buying up dollars and because they had understood
[Guest]: so little, they were not sterilizing them.
[Guest]: So back to back, in other words, in our audience, we're not used to the word sterilized intervention
[Guest]: by the central bank.
[Guest]: It basically means that you buy foreign currency and so in your monetary base, you're adding
[Guest]: to your monetary base by buying foreign currency because for every rupee you buy, you've issued,
[Guest]: sorry, for every dollar you buy, you've issued a number of rupees.
[Guest]: If you sterilize it, which means that if you're worrying about the impact it's going to have
[Guest]: on the monetary base, then you sell government bonds and you pull that money back so that
[Guest]: you don't let liquidity in the economy increase.
[Guest]: You know, it was early days, they also had no experience.
[Guest]: So they did unsterilized intervention and there was just very little understanding of
[Guest]: what was going on.
[Guest]: And then they started talking about that we are building reserves, that we're doing this
[Guest]: because we are building reserves.
[Guest]: It sounded very good to everybody in government.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because in this 91 crisis where, you know, that whole story, I'm sure everybody has heard
[Guest]: it a thousand times, but the story that India mortgaged a plane full of gold and we went
[Guest]: with a begging bowl when we didn't have even 15 days worth of imports left, that story
[Guest]: would be told again and again.
[Guest]: And it would be said that, oh, so we are just, you know, we want to be safe, so we are buying
[Guest]: reserves.
[Guest]: People would justify holding those reserves by saying, oh, there is this in month rule,
[Guest]: in month of import cover, there's this guidotti rule that we should have be holding so much
[Guest]: of reserves or we, you know, there's so much hot money in, so we should be holding reserves
[Guest]: for that.
[Guest]: But essentially what was happening was that they were buying reserves to manipulate the
[Guest]: rupee.
[Guest]: They were just buying dollars because we are getting too much of an inflow of dollars.
[Guest]: And this kind of continued for a while.
[Guest]: And it was not that there was any great understanding of what is reserve adequacy and how much reserves
[Guest]: would be held.
[Guest]: So if one said that, look, this is an embarrassment of riches.
[Guest]: I mean, I remember the phrase because I had a business standard column and, you know,
[Guest]: the editor had very nicely found this nice, you know, that the titles are given by the
[Guest]: page editor.
[Guest]: So it was the embarrassment of riches.
[Guest]: And you know, when one tried to say that, look, you don't need these, you're holding
[Guest]: too much.
[Guest]: I remember this was came up in a Nimrana conference, my first Nimrana conference where I said,
[Guest]: look, this is becoming like Food Corporation of India.
[Guest]: You know, you're just buying up something because it's there and then you won't be able
[Guest]: to get rid of it.
[Guest]: You try selling your reserves like you try to sell your wheat and your prices will drop.
[Guest]: So what we are doing is not thought through policy.
[Guest]: But you know, of course, people became very unhappy, particularly the RBI.
[Guest]: So Dr. Rakesh Mohan used to be my boss at NCIR, he was the director general.
[Guest]: And so I knew him very well.
[Guest]: And so he would tell me that, oh, you know, every Wednesday, we read what Hazira said
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: So they were not happy.
[Amit Varma]: Because the RBI is going to come calling and they're going to, what was the pushback like
[Amit Varma]: in those days?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what were the other big battles?
[Amit Varma]: One, of course, is this, as you pointed out with the RBI regarding inflation and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But what were your through the years?
[Amit Varma]: What were your other kind of, you know, big battles like in terms of mindset and did that
[Amit Varma]: mindset ever begin to change?
[Guest]: There are many more people today who agree on many of these issues.
[Guest]: So among the other battles, one, for example, has been a later one, but one has been the
[Guest]: Debt Management Office that we needed bond market.
[Guest]: India needs a bond market.
[Guest]: I mean, I thought that's something that everybody would very easily agree with that.
[Guest]: I'm saying we need a bond market.
[Guest]: I'm not saying we need a corporate bond market.
[Guest]: OK.
[Guest]: Now, to me, it seems obvious that if the government bond market and the corporate bond market
[Guest]: are two different markets, you don't have liquidity, you don't have the players.
[Guest]: But you'll see a lot of people talk about a corporate bond market.
[Guest]: But when it comes to having a bond market, then because, you know, there's this issue
[Guest]: of RBI is the regulator in the government bond market.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of pushback.
[Guest]: RBI is not just the regulator.
[Guest]: They own the depository, they own the exchange, and, you know, they are themselves trading
[Guest]: on that market and they are issuing securities for the government.
[Guest]: So there is a lot of pushback on some of these.
[Guest]: And I think a lot of that pushback is because of the fact that people don't like to see
[Guest]: change.
[Amit Varma]: They're kind of stuck in the inertia and their ways of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: I'm trying to, you know, one question I've kind of had, and I know it's complicated.
[Amit Varma]: What has been our direction since 91, since today?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, there's not one answer to that.
[Amit Varma]: And even within the question, I mean it in multiple ways, like what is there a directionality
[Amit Varma]: when we can talk about mindsets?
[Amit Varma]: And this would involve like mindsets in government, this would involve mindsets, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: the general discourse outside.
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things that seems to me is that, okay, we made some reforms, which
[Amit Varma]: we had to in 91, and those happened.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, everything was sporadic.
[Amit Varma]: There were moments where there were impulses towards reform, where individuals kind of
[Amit Varma]: tried to do things.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, inertia set in again, and our default thinking has remained that the
[Amit Varma]: thinking that the state has to have control of everything.
[Amit Varma]: And you've kind of straddled this entire landscape, right, both as someone who's been in policy,
[Amit Varma]: studying economics, and as a public intellectual of sorts.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what has that movement been like?
[Amit Varma]: Has it been one step forward, one step backward?
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of it.
[Guest]: I think it's been a very difficult journey for reforms.
[Guest]: So if I'm a reform set out on a journey, then I'm not gathering too much moss.
[Guest]: There aren't too many people who are moving with me.
[Guest]: Again, you know, I think there are tough wars, there are vested interests.
[Guest]: So that is what holds back.
[Guest]: So it's not so much that people don't understand, I think that there are vested interests, and
[Guest]: then people pull back on reforms.
[Guest]: So I mean, giving you this example that I was just giving about the bond market.
[Guest]: So what we were trying to do for a long time, for a very long time, I mean, RBI had also
[Guest]: proposed it, government was trying for a very long time is to set up an independent debt
[Guest]: management office, so that that would, you know, that usually when we look around, then
[Guest]: countries have done that.
[Guest]: Most countries, not every country, but most countries have done that.
[Guest]: And that really helps in building your bond market.
[Guest]: And, you know, so if you look, I'm just giving you this example, because I'm more familiar
[Guest]: with the reforms in the financial sector than in any other space.
[Guest]: So what happened?
[Guest]: Finance Minister Jaitley, even he tabled the bill in Parliament, there's so much pushback.
[Guest]: And then, because politicians also have, I guess, limited capital, political capital,
[Guest]: that they don't want to use it on something that is not going to give them immediate returns.
[Guest]: The bill was withdrawn.
[Guest]: And you know, after years of pushing this, finally having it tabled in Parliament, and
[Guest]: then, you know, when the budget was to be, this is the 2015 budget, when the budget was
[Guest]: to be voted upon, that day, the finance minister rolled it back.
[Guest]: And this was a reform that the country needed, that the country still needs.
[Guest]: But you know, it's not on the table anymore.
[Guest]: Many things don't even come to the table.
[Guest]: At least this was a bill that had been tabled.
[Guest]: But many things don't come to the table.
[Guest]: There are others like the FRDI bill, the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance bill that
[Guest]: went to Standing Committee.
[Guest]: There was a lot of pushback from, you know, public sector banks who said, oh, this means
[Guest]: that all these banks will be taken over, and all kinds of rumors were floated about the
[Guest]: Bill in Clause, about the amount of deposit insurance, all kinds of things which were
[Guest]: completely incorrect.
[Guest]: But that led to the bill being withdrawn.
[Guest]: So pushbacks happen, I think, not just because of the mindset.
[Guest]: Of course, I completely agree with you, as I was saying that there is a mindset issue
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: But that mindset is actually used, used in the sense of taken, made you, you know, misused
[Guest]: by those who have vested interests, and they managed to push back.
[Guest]: And that's why I think a lot of things don't happen.
[Guest]: Many things have been stuck at very early stages for years, but they don't go through.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of bigger questions I want to get to from here.
[Amit Varma]: And the first one has a smaller question before it, in fact, which is sort of the definition
[Amit Varma]: of reforms.
[Amit Varma]: Like, if we are to define reforms, it seems to me that most reforms would go in one fundamental
[Amit Varma]: direction, which is that our state has been too top heavy, it's been too oppressive.
[Amit Varma]: And many reforms are just getting out of the way, letting society solve its own problems,
[Amit Varma]: letting markets work and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of the 91 reforms were exactly about this.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this leads me to the first of my questions, which is that if one of the things that reforms
[Amit Varma]: are supposed to do is reduce the power of the state, and you know, empower common people,
[Amit Varma]: then given that the state is supposed to make these reforms, doesn't it make reforms in
[Amit Varma]: a sense impossible that there is always going to be pushback.
[Amit Varma]: And unless you have, say, a transformative moment of crisis like 1991, that reforms are
[Amit Varma]: just going to be very unusual, because they go against all incentives of anyone in a position
[Amit Varma]: of power.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, of course, the mindset issue is one issue that, you know, most of them will believe
[Amit Varma]: by conviction that this is the right way that the state should control everything.
[Amit Varma]: But even if that were not the case, you know, when is the state ever going to give up power?
[Amit Varma]: So is that something that you kind of think about?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: But you know, I think that sometimes what happens is that the politician can see five
[Guest]: years ahead, whereas the bureaucrat is seeing maybe the next six months until his retirement,
[Guest]: and he's being risk averse and not doing anything.
[Guest]: But the politician can see a little bit further ahead, he does have to win elections again.
[Guest]: And you know, parties can see not just five years ahead, but even further, because they
[Guest]: have to grow and stay.
[Guest]: So I'm not saying that they all understand what is to be done, there is often lack of
[Guest]: understanding and, you know, expertise and in-depth knowledge.
[Guest]: But if there are things that need to be done, which they feel that people will not oppose,
[Guest]: then those do get pushed through now the farm bills, okay.
[Guest]: Now that was, I mean, we talk about the 91 reforms, but if you think about what were
[Guest]: the reforms, they were just industry and trade, you left agriculture out, you left the bulk
[Guest]: of the financial sector out, okay.
[Guest]: So when you start doing farm bills or the reforms to liberalize financial, sorry, agricultural
[Guest]: markets, which should have been done in 91, when you try to do them now, you saw the pushback.
[Guest]: And I think that that will reduce the ability of any government to go further.
[Guest]: But it is not that nothing was tried and it would not have given immediate benefits.
[Guest]: It would have liberalized agricultural markets in a manner that they should have been liberalized.
[Guest]: So, you know, I think while people say that being a democracy means that you don't do
[Guest]: reform because you do populist things and you only look at the short term.
[Guest]: But I think that sometimes you do reforms because you are also answerable to the people
[Guest]: who you're going to go back to five years later.
[Guest]: So you want to have something to show to the people.
[Guest]: And if there is not much opposition, then you will do those.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with that.
[Amit Varma]: But I also disagree with the part of it like you spoke about, you know, the bureaucrats
[Amit Varma]: having a six month window and the politicians having a longer term view.
[Amit Varma]: But I think one of the things that gets in the way of reforms also is that politicians
[Amit Varma]: have relatively short election cycles in terms of the next election is not always just five
[Amit Varma]: years away.
[Amit Varma]: There are elections happening somewhere or the other.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're thinking at the national level, you're thinking, oh, Bengal elections is next
[Amit Varma]: or UP elections is next year.
[Amit Varma]: So you are kind of short termist.
[Amit Varma]: And also your, you know, your bound is how people perceive what you are doing.
[Amit Varma]: For example, a farm loan waiver, which almost became the rigor for every party to promise
[Amit Varma]: before every polls, a farm loan waiver, which is, you know, just a short term anesthetic
[Amit Varma]: will always have more takers than deeper structural solutions to whatever the problem may be.
[Amit Varma]: And also parties may kind of bind themselves into a corner with, say, the kind of nationalistic
[Amit Varma]: rhetoric that we see from this party sometimes where you talk of Atma Nirbharta and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And those can also lead to bad economics.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, good politics can often lead to bad economics.
[Amit Varma]: I've done an episode with Pooja Mehra on her book, The Lost Decade.
[Amit Varma]: And she pointed out that how, you know, some of the impetus behind why Modi abandoned reforms
[Amit Varma]: came after he was accused of being Sood Bhut ki Sarkar.
[Amit Varma]: And then he went all populist and, you know, reforms just stalled.
[Amit Varma]: And then the disastrous demonetization also came about his perception of what would play
[Amit Varma]: well with the common people.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe he was right because it did play well, even though it was, of course, a horrendous
[Amit Varma]: misstep.
[Amit Varma]: And what we see here, like I did an episode with our mutual friend Ajay Shah on the farm
[Amit Varma]: bills, where we kind of discussed about how the economic thrust of it is was great.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, the ruling party completely messed up the politics of it and didn't go
[Amit Varma]: about it the way that it should have.
[Amit Varma]: And here also we see an example of where, you know, even like if you're trying to push
[Amit Varma]: through a measure which you know will be good in the long run, but in the short run might
[Amit Varma]: hurt people with vested interests or might hurt people in other ways.
[Amit Varma]: They are, of course, going to fight back.
[Amit Varma]: And our politics is so polarized that then that can paralyze all movement, as seems to
[Amit Varma]: have happened in the case of the farm bills.
[Amit Varma]: So this relationship between politics and economics, how do you see it?
[Amit Varma]: Because it seems to me to be more an adversarial one than otherwise that good politics will
[Amit Varma]: generally make for bad economics and vice versa, because, of course, the incentive of
[Amit Varma]: the politician is to provide good governance.
[Amit Varma]: But number one, that governance is more something that he or she wants to be visible in the
[Amit Varma]: short term.
[Amit Varma]: And they are more keen on narratives rather than actual governance on the ground, as we've
[Amit Varma]: seen.
[Guest]: So if I look back at the NDA 1 versus, say, the UPA 1 and 2, then what you're saying would
[Guest]: imply that it doesn't matter, you know, there would have been no difference in the economic
[Guest]: policies or, you know, the previous Congress regimes after that, OK?
[Guest]: But when I actually look at what kind of reforms were done in NDA 1, they were much more than
[Guest]: what was done in the previous five years or the later five years, and bringing the private
[Guest]: sector in for infrastructure, because there were shortages of, you know, capital or liberalizing
[Guest]: capital account opening, allowing Indian companies to go abroad, which, you know, ultimately
[Guest]: they became bigger multinationals, brought in technology, many, many, many, many, there's
[Guest]: a large number of pension reforms, OK?
[Guest]: So going from a defined benefit to a defined contribution system and a list of many things.
[Guest]: Now, many of those things were fundamentally a belief in markets, a belief in the private
[Guest]: sector, which we did not see in the Congress regimes.
[Guest]: So my sense is that it does matter.
[Guest]: Of course, all parties have to win elections.
[Guest]: Of course, all parties have their own, you know, machinery to take care of, individuals
[Guest]: to take care of, whatever, whatever, and so on.
[Guest]: But if there are opportunities, then we do see some not going towards markets.
[Guest]: So instead, when UPA comes back, when you see Manrega, you see a lot of welfare programs.
[Guest]: I mean, the state pretty much moves towards bankruptcy in that space, where before growing
[Guest]: rich, you have started doing a lot of redistribution, which then, of course, means that you have
[Amit Varma]: less money for, you know, the roads that I was fighting about, when you were 19.
[Guest]: So I do think that it matters that the party, you know, has a certain thinking.
[Guest]: And so there are tactics and then there are things which, OK, if you get an opportunity,
[Guest]: let's do this.
[Guest]: But it is a reform, and it is a reform that actually is a pro-market reform.
[Guest]: And I'm not denying that politicians or bureaucrats want to have power.
[Guest]: That's how the system till today.
[Guest]: It's not that we don't have state intervention today.
[Guest]: We have huge amounts of state intervention today.
[Guest]: But I'm just saying that maybe, you know, you're a little younger, so you're not seeing
[Guest]: this in these five-year chunks.
[Guest]: But if you, sorry, if you look at NDA 1, and I look back, and I see there's quite a lot
[Guest]: that was done, which was pro-market reforms, which was economic reforms.
[Amit Varma]: That's true.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of follow-up questions.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them actually, you know, you stated it as buttressing my point, but I think it
[Amit Varma]: actually in a way it might buttress my point, which is that you spoke about the reforms
[Amit Varma]: NDA 1 did.
[Amit Varma]: And I agree that I think, you know, some of the stuff they did was terrific.
[Amit Varma]: But first of all, would you agree that the benefits of that actually showed up in the
[Amit Varma]: figures of the UPA?
[Amit Varma]: Like people will today say that, oh, in the 10 years of the UPA, we grew this much.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and I go nuts trying to say that, hey, this was because of the reforms
[Amit Varma]: of Vajpayee put into place.
[Amit Varma]: And then that would seem to state that if Vajpayee in retrospect was to, you know, sit
[Amit Varma]: there, he would say that, look, I can do these, but I might lose the elections, and then the
[Amit Varma]: next guy will take all the credit.
[Amit Varma]: So why should I think so far ahead?
[Amit Varma]: So that's kind of the first of my follow-ups.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a very good question.
[Guest]: You see, so look at when NDA 1 lost, it was mainly attributed to the India Shining campaign,
[Guest]: that it was because, you know, the better off were doing better than they had been.
[Guest]: That is what should not have been said.
[Guest]: And that is what lost the elections.
[Guest]: And that the benefits, of course, showed up later.
[Guest]: But I'm talking about a more deeper, shall I say, trait or character that you might do
[Guest]: or not do something because of winning or losing elections.
[Guest]: Okay, so that's one thing.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, if you had no constraints, what would you do?
[Guest]: So if you had no constraints, would you be bringing in more welfare programs, large ones,
[Guest]: you know, and not ones that are interest subvention, where the government is putting this much
[Guest]: money and, you know, getting leverage out of it?
[Guest]: Not those, but, you know, very large welfare programs, which the state has little capacity
[Guest]: to actually even handle, or would you be trying to do?
[Guest]: In fact, if I look back at the Atmanirbhar package, a lot of those things were, many
[Guest]: of those, including the farm bills, more prominently than anything else, the farm bills, were things
[Guest]: that should have been done earlier, which were pro-market reforms.
[Guest]: So what is it that you would do if you had been completely unconstrained?
[Guest]: And what I'm saying is simply this, that different political parties do have different characters,
[Guest]: do have different ideologies, would do different things if they were completely unconstrained.
[Guest]: Then, of course, the constraint of elections comes in when the NDA would not run another
[Guest]: India Shining program, wouldn't do many of those things, would back off when you say
[Guest]: Sudbhut ki Sarkar.
[Guest]: But if there was unconstrained maximization, then would they, you know, do things differently
[Guest]: from what the Congress would do?
[Guest]: And I think that parties, at least in our two big parties, from what I feel looking
[Guest]: back is that they do differently, they do things, they pick different battles.
[Guest]: And even though both are constrained, but, you know, to the extent, at least the PDMA
[Guest]: bill was tabled in Parliament.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they rolled back.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm not sure how much of this sort of fundamental thinking, as you seem to imply,
[Amit Varma]: we saw in Modi's first term, you know, where I think a lot of the, I mean, I wouldn't even
[Amit Varma]: call demonetization a misstep, it was just a massive blunder.
[Amit Varma]: And the thinking behind it was completely wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of what seems to have happened in those five years seems to be more the whims
[Amit Varma]: and fancies of certain individuals rather than any kind of directed thinking.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, you know, the second question I had from what you sort of said
[Amit Varma]: earlier is again, a kind of a mindset question, which is, again, you know, talking about the
[Amit Varma]: growth versus welfare slash redistribution paradigm.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't even want to use the word welfare, because it implies, you know, welfare is a
[Amit Varma]: good word, you want people's welfare, but what we call welfare and economics doesn't
[Amit Varma]: always lead to good outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it just speaks to good intentions.
[Amit Varma]: And we, you know, make the error of often judging policies by intentions and not outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: But the truth again, there is that again, I think, to me is sort of shows a difference
[Amit Varma]: between a positive some mindset and a zero some mindset where the redistribution mindset
[Amit Varma]: is that some people are rich, some are poor, we got to do something about the poor, how
[Amit Varma]: do we do it, we must redistribute.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, if overall, your country is poor, that's not going to achieve anything.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas a growth mindset is that, you know, let's grow, everybody grows together, maybe
[Amit Varma]: inequality grows as well.
[Amit Varma]: But both the rich and the poorer will get a little richer, at least you're solving the
[Amit Varma]: problem of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one of the things that I find is that most people think inequality and poverty are
[Amit Varma]: exactly the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're thinking in terms of growth, it doesn't seem to me that that is the case,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that, you know, for example, through the 90s, I would say that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: India lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, and inequality grew.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't see that inequality as a bad thing, I think a fundamental problem is poverty.
[Amit Varma]: And it's really wealthier nations, that having solved the problem of poverty, can then look
[Amit Varma]: at inequality and say that, okay, let's redistribute and all that, you know, even the Nordic states
[Amit Varma]: really became welfare states after they reached a certain level of wealth, and they could
[Amit Varma]: actually afford to redistribute.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not sure that we can really afford to redistribute too much.
[Amit Varma]: So it just in terms of mindsets, have you seen this changing?
[Amit Varma]: Or would you say that certain parties like the Congress, for example, have this zero
[Amit Varma]: sum mindset.
[Amit Varma]: And also, when you think about how it plays in politics, redistributive politics will
[Amit Varma]: always play better, because you seem compassionate, that will bestow all this largesse on the
[Amit Varma]: people, it seems compassionate, it plays better in political terms.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of these pro poor policies, as we have seen through the decades, actually harms
[Amit Varma]: the poor.
[Amit Varma]: And honestly, you know, even in the last few years, I haven't really seen, you know, I
[Amit Varma]: agreed that the Vajpayee government was refreshing in many ways, but I haven't seen that in the
[Amit Varma]: Modi government at all.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they've also been quite welfarist.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that could be one reason they did well in the 2019 elections, because Modi actually
[Amit Varma]: managed to implement some of the welfarism in the heartland and so on.
[Guest]: My understanding of what Modi tried to do was to get more to the people out of the same
[Guest]: money that the Congress was spending.
[Guest]: So if you beam it directly into their accounts, which is something that Montech used to be
[Guest]: wanting to do towards, you know, Montech and Nandan, they were making plans and those are
[Guest]: things that they were wanting to do, and in fact, UIDAI was set up as a structure that
[Guest]: would allow them to do that.
[Guest]: NIPFP had done a study for the then Planning Commission, where we had worked out on how
[Guest]: ghost beneficiaries and duplicates would be reduced by Aadhaar and therefore all programs
[Guest]: of the government should actually be done through Aadhaar and there should be direct
[Guest]: benefit transfers.
[Guest]: So, you know, when we study Latin American countries and we study direct benefit transfers,
[Guest]: cash transfers, instead of the kind of stuff that we used to have, then we used to say
[Guest]: that that is better economics, you're spending the money.
[Guest]: Now that way Modi got more bang for the buck, because when something goes straight into
[Guest]: a Jandhan account, Aadhaar-linked Jandhan account, instead of, you know, it being leaked,
[Guest]: what did Rajiv Gandhi do?
[Amit Varma]: I think Rajiv Gandhi said that something like 85% of, there's 85% leakage.
[Amit Varma]: So if you give a hundred rupees to a guy, by the time it reaches him, there's 15 rupees
[Guest]: left.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So, when you are in a system where there are a lot of middlemen and the middlemen would,
[Guest]: I guess, not something I know, but I guess over the years have allegiance to the Congress
[Guest]: because, you know, that's the old elite, the old political elite.
[Guest]: And now there's no point in your feeding those middlemen, right?
[Guest]: Because they're not yours.
[Guest]: And secondly, you will get more bang for the buck, you know, when the hundred rupees reaches
[Guest]: your voter directly, in a manner which, I mean, all Latin American economists and many
[Guest]: of us who, till it started happening here, were lauding cash transfers, were saying that
[Guest]: that's the right thing to do.
[Guest]: Then it is an approach that, just let's assume for a moment, you know, put the economic reforms,
[Guest]: pro-market economic reforms, as we understand it, to one side for the moment.
[Guest]: Let's just try to assume that it was a UPA-3, okay, which went with, I'm not saying that
[Guest]: Modi was UPA-3, so please, you know, I'm not, I'm only saying that, let's just assume that
[Guest]: we take it as a continuation of the plans that were made by Montek and Nandan for the
[Guest]: Planning Commission, which was the cost-benefit analysis study that I did, okay, at an IPFP
[Guest]: for the Planning Commission, that this is what should be done and that this is how you'll
[Guest]: reduce the leakages, both for ghost beneficiaries and for duplicates, and you will reduce leakages
[Guest]: that go to the middlemen, and then let's say they had implemented that.
[Guest]: I think all of us would have been saying that's very good.
[Guest]: What happened, in my opinion, was that we had very high expectations of NDA-1 sort of
[Guest]: reforms from NDA-2, and instead of, and maybe in the meantime, the party had understood
[Guest]: that doing the NDA-1 reforms doesn't get them votes, so maybe they could slip in a reform
[Guest]: here and there because they're not opposed to those reforms, but they could not be showing
[Guest]: them as their big, that was not, you know, the big thing that they did.
[Guest]: In fact, if the big thing that they do is to stop leakages and directly reach people,
[Guest]: then you know, I think it's a very, very clever, very, very smart, very smart political move,
[Guest]: and I think that's perhaps a part of what won the 2019 election.
[Amit Varma]: So to sort of paraphrase what you're saying, you're saying that yeah, okay, there's a trade-off
[Amit Varma]: between growth and redistribution, we should have pro-growth policies, but given the political
[Amit Varma]: reality that those are much harder to do, and much harder to pull off given political
[Amit Varma]: constraints, maybe it makes sense that if you have to do a certain amount of redistribution,
[Amit Varma]: do the damn thing well, just be much more efficient.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, something like this, which is cutting off leakage from, you know, leakage
[Amit Varma]: of 85%, as it were, maybe more, maybe less in specific instances, is something that is
[Amit Varma]: going to pay you kind of great political dividends, so why not do that, and maybe other reforms
[Guest]: can happen, you know, economically, plus economically, economically, as I was repeating that, when
[Guest]: you study the impact of leakages on the FISC, and you look at whether, you know, you want
[Guest]: to keep on letting that money slip through without having an impact on poverty, then
[Guest]: it makes economic sense to do direct cash transfers.
[Guest]: And if you spend the first two years doing this, whatever, Jam, Aadhaar, Trinity, whatever
[Guest]: they call it, Jandhan Aadhaar Mobile, right, Jam, yeah, Jandhan Aadhaar Mobile, so if you
[Guest]: spend time building the whole infrastructure, so I was in the ministry at that time, I was
[Guest]: in the Ministry of Finance, you know, so as far as I was concerned, they did all the macroeconomic
[Guest]: stabilization things with fiscal policy and inflation targeting, and some limited reforms
[Guest]: that I had been talking about, but on the other hand, this was a big focus of the government,
[Guest]: that we just get the money directly to people.
[Guest]: That's not bad economic policy, that if you were doing redistribution badly, and you start
[Guest]: doing it properly, that let's say that's your focus, not your focus is not to do agricultural
[Guest]: bills on the first day, you did that in India too, I think that was a smart thing to do.
[Guest]: I think that makes sense, not just politically, not just politically, it saves your fiscal
[Guest]: lot of money.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know, think of the corruption, the leakages, the rent-seeking, what we have,
[Guest]: we can just spend all, everything possible.
[Amit Varma]: So you were like a principal economic advisor in 2014 and 2015.
[Amit Varma]: Now it's interesting that, you know, if I remember correctly, at that time, you sided
[Amit Varma]: with Raghuram Rajan, when he spoke about inflation targeting and all that, and Piyush Goyal was
[Amit Varma]: against it and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So what's that experience like, like one of the things that, you know, Pooja Mehra wrote
[Amit Varma]: about in her book, The Lost Decade was that there was a certain continuity that when Arun
[Amit Varma]: Jaitley came in as FM, he carried forward some of the thinking of the later months of
[Amit Varma]: Chidambaram.
[Amit Varma]: At that time, there was some unity there, and then everything kind of fell apart as
[Amit Varma]: it went along.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you know, I know that there will, of course, be things that you cannot
[Amit Varma]: speak about or, you know, can't reveal.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, what was that experience like of working within the government?
[Amit Varma]: Was there a sense that there is one direction that we are going in?
[Amit Varma]: Were you taken seriously?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you did one of the economic surveys, yeah?
[Guest]: Yeah, very much, certainly on inflation targeting.
[Guest]: I mean, this was work that I had done when I was part of the research team of FSLRC,
[Guest]: the Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission.
[Guest]: This was work where I had a chapter in the book that was released by Prime Minister Modi
[Guest]: when he was just elected, I mean, within the first few days.
[Guest]: And this was something that I'd been working on for quite a while.
[Guest]: And then when it came to, you know, working on first the Monetary Policy Framework Agreement,
[Guest]: that was done in 2015.
[Guest]: And finance secretary knew, you know, the DEA secretary was Rajiv Mehrishi, who first
[Guest]: it was Mr. Mayaram, who I worked with, and he was also continuing that agenda forward.
[Guest]: And then Mr. Mehrishi came and he put, you know, the accelerator was pressed very hard.
[Guest]: And a lot of this work got done at that time.
[Guest]: So by March 2016, the inflation targeting, the bill was actually, the RBI Act was amended
[Guest]: and the objective of monetary policy was changed.
[Guest]: So this was a period that was, I should say, exhilarating.
[Amit Varma]: You say this was a period which was exhilarating, why did the period end?
[Guest]: Well, I moved back to NIPFP and Mr. Mehrishi moved on, he became the Home Secretary.
[Guest]: And then I think the way things went, it was also Arvind then joined as CEA.
[Guest]: So earlier he was not Chief Economic Advisor.
[Guest]: And then they started, Arvind was focusing on infrastructure, public sector, public investment
[Guest]: in infrastructure.
[Guest]: There was focus on doing NIIF funds for investment, basically, the focus shifted to how can we
[Guest]: increase public investment away from, you know, when you do financial sector reforms,
[Guest]: the returns come a decade later.
[Guest]: So I think part of what happened was that, yes, we've done some of this and this will
[Guest]: take years to play out, but now we better get back to the task on hand, which is try
[Guest]: to push investment.
[Guest]: So the focus shifted a bit.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: So what we'll do now is we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And when we come back, we'll talk more about the economy as it is now and how it has been
[Amit Varma]: in the last few years and how it has been post COVID and how it's all going to play
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog, India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons, and now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Ela Patnaik about the Indian economy as it is today.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll continue with kind of general questions for a while because this is sort of a question
[Amit Varma]: that has a bearing on everything.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a question about data.
[Amit Varma]: Like as an economist, you need raw material to work with.
[Amit Varma]: And in India, famously, the quality of data is incredibly iffy.
[Amit Varma]: So much of India is actually in the informal sector, for example, like, I remember sort
[Amit Varma]: of interrogating Arvind Subramaniam on this when he was on my show about, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: impact of demonetization.
[Amit Varma]: And my point is that, you know, so much of the data is just not there, because it would
[Amit Varma]: have hurt the informal sector the most.
[Amit Varma]: And even a lot of the data which is there, like the GDP, for example, which is like a
[Amit Varma]: sort of a marker in the public eyes for how the economy is doing.
[Amit Varma]: But number one, the methodology keeps changing and is somewhat opaque.
[Amit Varma]: And number two, any metric that exists can be gamed.
[Amit Varma]: I had done an episode with Rajeshwari Sengupta on the GDP as well.
[Amit Varma]: And it's historically been a metric that can be gamed, has been gamed.
[Amit Varma]: One doesn't know how much it truly reflects either progress or the opposite of it.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your approach towards data in the sense that, you know, since the mid 90s, you
[Amit Varma]: had to work in this environment where you know your data is iffy.
[Amit Varma]: So do you figure out proxy ways of getting data?
[Amit Varma]: Do you do different kinds of jugaad for your analysis?
[Amit Varma]: What's your approach towards that?
[Guest]: And how much of a hindrance is it?
[Guest]: So I started working on business cycles, which mean trying to track the economy in 96.
[Guest]: You know, that was one of my first projects and it was a project for the RBI at NCAR,
[Guest]: where we were trying to look at how can we measure the economy as it is today?
[Guest]: How can we measure the economy looking forward as well?
[Guest]: And GDP is not even adequate for that.
[Guest]: So one issue that you're talking about is the quality of the GDP data, but the second
[Guest]: is that it comes later.
[Guest]: So you know what happened if you know a bit about what happened earlier, but you don't
[Guest]: know what is happening now.
[Guest]: So what we did was to, well, we had 105 monthly series that were available.
[Guest]: So you know, you think about price series, imports, exports, money supply, IIP, then
[Guest]: now we've added more lately, I continue to, you know, do the same thing, because tracking
[Guest]: the economy is something that's of deep interest to me.
[Guest]: So now we've added data from sales and profits of firms.
[Guest]: So there's a prowess database where they put together firm performance, so annual reports
[Guest]: of firms, so we track that.
[Guest]: So we don't just look at only GDP, we look at a number of indicators.
[Guest]: There is actually a well-established literature on this, where starting from Mitchell and
[Guest]: Burns at NBER in the US in the 40s, there is an attempt by economists to catch what
[Guest]: is happening today, to catch it not just through GDP, but to understand it through a number
[Guest]: of other indicators.
[Guest]: We have also been trying to build a coincident indicator series and a leading indicator series
[Guest]: to see how they behave.
[Guest]: Now, very often, you know, we see things a little before they happen, because we are
[Guest]: looking at these various indicators.
[Guest]: Of course, we are constrained by not being able to see everything, because, you know,
[Guest]: we don't capture the informal sector.
[Guest]: But you know, we don't capture the informal sector from the production side.
[Guest]: But if you think about it, then people in the informal sector also live, consume, buy
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: So, you know, GDP is measured not in just one way, but in three different ways.
[Guest]: And we do capture some of it.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give me any example that comes to mind of when looking at data in all these
[Amit Varma]: very granular, unconventional, nuanced ways might have given you insight about something
[Amit Varma]: that is happening or something that is going to happen, which you would otherwise have
[Amit Varma]: missed?
[Amit Varma]: Like, were there any aha moments in all these years of studying the data, which kind of
[Amit Varma]: made you see something a little better?
[Guest]: Well, I think it's more a question of timeliness, that one is able to see that, you know, if
[Guest]: it's imports.
[Guest]: First of all, it's not very unconventional, by the way, as I said, it's been done since
[Guest]: the 1940s.
[Guest]: But in India, I mean, yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So you know, you start looking at import data, we even make an index of our leading indicators,
[Guest]: some others also do.
[Guest]: But if you look at import data, it reflects what is coming later.
[Guest]: So you kind of catch on a little sooner.
[Guest]: So it's a question of time, not so much of being, you know, knowing more or less about
[Guest]: the economy.
[Guest]: So you get to know a little bit sooner when you track other series, which are more frequent.
[Guest]: Like I was looking at the export data.
[Guest]: So weekly in the first week of May, this May, exports are showing an increase of 80% over
[Guest]: the last year, when last year, there was a lockdown, of course.
[Guest]: So there's a base effect as well.
[Guest]: But at least it's showing 80%, it's showing a positive high growth, because the world
[Guest]: economy has started picking up.
[Guest]: So you know, then you it helps you understand better of where you're going, and you just
[Guest]: get a bit of an early start.
[Amit Varma]: So the way I want to talk about the economy is maybe the last few years and then come
[Amit Varma]: to COVID.
[Amit Varma]: But an immediate question, which is kind of sparked by the beginning of this pandemic,
[Amit Varma]: because I just want to understand how an economist thinks about specific problems.
[Amit Varma]: So now let's say that in March last year, if an economist working with government and
[Amit Varma]: I'm specifying working with government in this hypothetical instance, because I don't
[Amit Varma]: just want to think of how economists sitting on the outside whose views may have no bearing
[Amit Varma]: on the world, how they think, but if you're working with government, if you're advising
[Amit Varma]: government, then how would one begin to calibrate a policy move, like a lockdown, like you've
[Amit Varma]: of course, characterized it as lives versus livelihoods, which of course it is.
[Amit Varma]: And you could also say in a sense as lives versus lives, because, you know, in the long
[Amit Varma]: run, there will be the impact of a lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this kind of policy measure seems to me to really be a terrible Hobson's choice
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that whatever you do, the bad effects of it are seen, and the good effects
[Amit Varma]: are unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So you you know, if you call a lockdown, you will, for example, see the impact on migrant
[Amit Varma]: labour on the economy, you'll see all of that what you will not see is the opportunity costs
[Amit Varma]: the lives that you've saved.
[Amit Varma]: And vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: If you don't call a lockdown, you'll see the lives of people who die.
[Amit Varma]: But what you won't see is that the economy is still functioning.
[Amit Varma]: Now, whenever one makes a decision like this, and unfortunately, with the Indian state,
[Amit Varma]: because of state capacity, there are only these very blunt tools, you either do a lockdown
[Amit Varma]: or you don't.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, given that that is the case, how would an economist think about this?
[Amit Varma]: Like what is the data you'd look at, what would you do to establish some kind of understanding
[Amit Varma]: of what the probabilities might be?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the political calculus and all that is something completely separate.
[Amit Varma]: But just to sort of understand how an economist thinks, what are the tools you're bringing
[Amit Varma]: into play here?
[Amit Varma]: How would you do it?
[Guest]: I would think about what is the kind of shock that this is.
[Guest]: So in the first lockdown, it was a supply side shock.
[Guest]: Because we said, okay, shut down, and companies had to shut down.
[Guest]: It wasn't so much a demand side shock.
[Guest]: I mean, of course, to some extent, you would call it a demand side shock, but it was a
[Guest]: temporary demand side shock, that is people could not go to the shops.
[Guest]: And so they were not buying products.
[Guest]: But suppose it had lasted, let's just because there's so much uncertainty that one doesn't
[Guest]: know whether it was going, how long it was going to last.
[Guest]: But suppose it had last, the lockdown and the pandemic had lasted one month.
[Guest]: And let's say that my understanding from not economics, but epidemiology and you know,
[Guest]: whatever, whatever the doctors were telling us was that it was going to last for one month.
[Guest]: Let's just assume.
[Guest]: Then I would try to understand, okay, if I, one month later, I allow people to get back
[Guest]: to work, then it will almost be, you know, the demand would not be hit.
[Guest]: It would mainly be the supply got affected.
[Guest]: Yes, there would be some people whose balance sheets would hurt, but, you know, we can go
[Guest]: forward.
[Guest]: Now, if I turn to today, and suppose, so again, data is very limited.
[Guest]: One would look at consumer sentiment.
[Guest]: One looks at imports in terms of activity, one looks at exports.
[Guest]: So, you know, looking at what is happening here, household expenditure, household, you
[Guest]: know, unemployment data that one gets, Mandrega data, because Mandrega is a good indicator
[Guest]: of people having gone back to villages and what they are doing now.
[Guest]: Putting all of this together, one would try to understand, has there been a year long
[Guest]: deep impact on people's incomes?
[Guest]: And if so, then are we going to see a deeper demand effect than we saw in the first case?
[Guest]: And that would help me to, and suppose, of course, somebody said that this would continue
[Guest]: for a year, okay?
[Guest]: Then one would try to think of what are the policies?
[Guest]: These are not easy choices.
[Guest]: As you very, very correctly said, whatever happens, you're going to be blamed for doing
[Guest]: the wrong thing.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: But, you know, then one would try to understand, okay, what does one require to give a demand
[Guest]: stimulus?
[Guest]: Initially, if you notice, I mean, somebody must have figured this out.
[Guest]: But there wasn't much of a demand stimulus given, because it was a supply side issue.
[Guest]: So when the package came, it had, you know, food and so on.
[Guest]: But other than that, it was reforms.
[Guest]: In some other countries, they continue to, they gave wages.
[Guest]: So I guess, you know, these are the tools I would use.
[Amit Varma]: This is how I would think about it.
[Amit Varma]: And how does one, like, for example, another policy debate that I've seen playing out in
[Amit Varma]: the United States, for example, is that when do we open schools?
[Amit Varma]: How long do we shut schools?
[Amit Varma]: You know, Anup Malani in an episode with Milan Vaishnav on his podcast, the Grand Tamasha,
[Amit Varma]: Milan's podcast, that is, had made the point that, you know, that if you shut schools for
[Amit Varma]: a year, for example, in a hypothetic situation, the loss to the economy in the future is also
[Amit Varma]: immense because human capital is getting affected.
[Amit Varma]: And you simply don't know that just mentally how the kids will be and how everything will
[Amit Varma]: proceed.
[Amit Varma]: There are so many kinds of imponderables.
[Amit Varma]: And at some level, when it comes to things like this, it seems to me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the cost goes somewhere, the benefits go somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: How can you even do a cost to benefit analysis?
[Amit Varma]: In many ways, it seems like apples and oranges.
[Amit Varma]: And the very act of attempting to do an analysis would also come down to say putting a price
[Amit Varma]: on a life.
[Amit Varma]: Do economists who often get a rap for being heartless, do they do that?
[Amit Varma]: Do they like implicitly are you having to put a price on lives?
[Amit Varma]: Like, if I was to tell you that the lockdown will save 100 lives but cost so many 100 crores,
[Amit Varma]: you would probably say, let's not have a lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: But if I tell you it will save 100,000 lives, and you know, the calculus changes.
[Amit Varma]: How does one, you know, come to grips with all of this?
[Guest]: I'm not sure that economists do this very differently from the rest of us.
[Guest]: And if they do, if they do, they're pretending to do it.
[Guest]: Because nobody can put a cost to a life.
[Guest]: You might have your measures, you might develop them because you want to be able to pay somebody
[Guest]: in case of an accident.
[Guest]: But you know, that's a bit of a practical thing.
[Guest]: But if you do it prior to the event, then I don't think anybody, economist or not has
[Guest]: the courage to say, these young girls, daughters of so and so can go die.
[Guest]: Nobody has the courage to do that.
[Guest]: And nobody, we don't think like that, we can't think like that.
[Guest]: So I'm not sure that, you know, this is something that anybody actually does.
[Guest]: Even though yes, you know, there might be academic papers and debates saying that, you
[Guest]: know, it's okay to lose 1000 lives and, you know, not spend money.
[Guest]: But you know, at least I've always been saying, initially spend what you have to on the RTPCR
[Guest]: test.
[Guest]: Let it be 1% of GDP and whoever spends it, whether it's state governments, central governments,
[Guest]: companies, schools, institutions, whoever spends it.
[Guest]: And today that spend what you need to on vaccination, you know, bring all the energy you have, bring
[Guest]: all the money you have.
[Guest]: I mean, you save a life, you can always earn more later, do something, not do something,
[Guest]: live frugally, whatever happens, but you know, once you've lost a life, it doesn't come back.
[Guest]: And you know, this is a pandemic, it's a once in, I don't know, we've never been in this
[Guest]: situation before of making these choices.
[Guest]: And I don't think anybody has the tools or is in a place to actually make these choices.
[Guest]: This thing, I think, comes down to the question of when you decide whether to do a national
[Guest]: lockdown or not to do a national lockdown, okay, that's what this will come down to.
[Guest]: Then the question to ask would not be whether you were making the decision between saving
[Guest]: lives and not saving lives, but it would really be that could a local lockdown save lives
[Guest]: as well, compared to a national lockdown, because a national lockdown absolutely does
[Guest]: lead to a lot of misery and loss of livelihoods.
[Guest]: But does it actually save more lives?
[Guest]: Does it, you know, so if somebody's ill in some other state, but like in Delhi, if we
[Guest]: have started recovering and positivity rate has gone down, and the number of infections
[Guest]: has gone down, then maybe a week or two down the line, if we decide to open up, even if
[Guest]: cases somewhere else are rising, then is it not more rational to do so?
[Amit Varma]: I think that's the choice.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so you know, when you said at the start of your answer that you think economists are
[Amit Varma]: just the same as normal people, what you went on to say was that none of us will want to
[Amit Varma]: place a value on a life.
[Amit Varma]: But I thought you meant the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: So I was a little surprised because I think implicitly everyone is placing a value on
[Amit Varma]: our life, like even my own, for example, like every time I cross the road, I know there
[Amit Varma]: is a very, very small probability that, you know, something will run me over.
[Amit Varma]: But I choose to make that choice, because the sort of utility of crossing the road is
[Amit Varma]: worth more to me than whatever that very tiny percentage is.
[Amit Varma]: And this, of course, you know, every time I go out on a drive, for example, I'm making
[Amit Varma]: the same kind of calculus, in a sense, I'm placing a certain value on my life.
[Amit Varma]: And I think economists would also implicitly at least have to do that, even if they can't
[Amit Varma]: put a number to it, because it is so icky.
[Amit Varma]: And as human beings, we want to think every life is priceless.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, in a thought experiment where a lockdown is going to cost, say, a thousand
[Amit Varma]: crores, but is going to save just one life, you know, and you would say that the loss
[Amit Varma]: of that thousand crores, the economy will actually cost many more lives somewhere down
[Amit Varma]: the line.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't actually know that.
[Amit Varma]: So somewhere there is a number at which you say this is a threshold we have to call a
[Amit Varma]: lockdown now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: But, you know, when it comes to things like giving indemnity, if the state has to say
[Guest]: that, OK, if something goes wrong, we'll pay for it, while if, you know, people don't get
[Guest]: the vaccine, oh, I will not give the vaccine, but I'll save, you know, whatever, ten thousand
[Guest]: crores.
[Guest]: OK, but, you know, ten crore people will die.
[Guest]: If that's the kind of choice, then it's an open, nobody, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, of course, I mean, I'm just saying that as economists, one is not doing
[Guest]: anything different.
[Guest]: I mean, you are you are placing a value on your life.
[Guest]: Ask your mom.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I in this present circumstance, I mean, frankly, I think we're both in agreement
[Amit Varma]: that we should just spend whatever to, you know, save lives because, you know, you'll
[Amit Varma]: spend a thousand crores, but in the long run save way more.
[Amit Varma]: And also indemnity, I guess you're referring to the whole Pfizer thing.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess you agree with me that we should just give indemnity.
[Amit Varma]: Every other country has given them indemnity, just bring them in, just get that, make the
[Amit Varma]: damn vaccine available.
[Guest]: Just feel that every day we are losing people and, you know, they won't come back.
[Guest]: Whereas if we put some money down, then we can always earn more money or even if we don't
[Amit Varma]: earn more money.
[Amit Varma]: It's fine.
[Guest]: I mean, we can live a bit more frugally.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's fine.
[Guest]: It's fine.
[Guest]: So I think this should be at the top of the agenda.
[Amit Varma]: It's just nuts.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, that's another discussion.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of get back to the economy now.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of zoom in and talk about, say, the trajectory of the last few years.
[Amit Varma]: I'd done an episode with Pooja Mehra on her book, The Lost Decade, where the trajectory
[Amit Varma]: that she shaped for me was that, look, our economy suddenly started doing much worse
[Amit Varma]: at around the time Pranab Mukherjee took over as finance minister because there were the
[Amit Varma]: terrorist attacks in Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, Shivraj Patil was Home Minister, did a lousy job.
[Amit Varma]: They shifted Chidambaram there, therefore Pranab took over finance, made a complete
[Amit Varma]: mess of it, started going downhill with a credit crisis, kind of got exacerbated.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a whole atmosphere of retrospective taxation and what that did for the investment
[Amit Varma]: mood.
[Amit Varma]: There was just a bunch of things which listeners can go listen to that episode and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And then when Modi came, they were, you know, Chidambaram took over after Pranab was elevated
[Amit Varma]: to the presidency for a while.
[Amit Varma]: But he was there for too short a time.
[Amit Varma]: And then Modi took over.
[Amit Varma]: And then politics came in the way the moment the suit boot ki sarkar jibes came, reforms
[Amit Varma]: went out of the window and demon happened, the incredibly botched GST happened and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just been downhill.
[Amit Varma]: And then COVID hit and everything's just been downhill for the last 10 years.
[Amit Varma]: Would you broadly agree with this narrative?
[Amit Varma]: And you've been much, much closer to the action.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of it?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm sure there's a lot of nuance you can add to this.
[Guest]: So I think 2011 or so is the period when I started seeing investment going down, private
[Guest]: investment.
[Guest]: I mean, really what has taken the economy up and down is cycles in private investment.
[Guest]: So 2011 is the period when it starts going down.
[Guest]: And I agree with most of what Pooja has said and what you're telling me.
[Guest]: But just to add to the story, in my opinion, the story began earlier.
[Guest]: The story began from 2004 to 2007.
[Guest]: And why do I say that?
[Guest]: Because that was the time when there was a lot of capital coming in.
[Guest]: RBI was buying up dollars, pushing liquidity into the system.
[Guest]: You know, we all look at it from our perspective.
[Guest]: So I look at it from the perspective of monetary policy.
[Guest]: And there was a time when credit was growing at about, in 2007, at about 40% per annum,
[Guest]: a very high growth of credit.
[Guest]: And banks were lending merrily, not being as prudent as they might have been if you
[Guest]: didn't have this huge liquidity sloshing around in the system.
[Guest]: And then came the 2007-2008 Lehman episode.
[Guest]: In fact, things start going bad even towards the end, right at the end of 2007.
[Guest]: So but of course, Lehman was the turning point.
[Guest]: And after that, you had a sudden contraction in the economy and a decline in demand.
[Guest]: A lot of the loans that had been given by the banking system were already in trouble.
[Guest]: Most infrastructure companies, there had been a lot of emphasis on infrastructure.
[Guest]: And you know, really, banks are not well suited to lend to infrastructure companies, because
[Guest]: there is a maturity mismatch.
[Guest]: The capacity of banks to assess those loans, to hold on to those loans for 30 years, to
[Guest]: resist political influence, and not to give loans, especially public sector banks, you
[Guest]: know, and with a regulator who would pretty much was turning a blind eye to the loans
[Guest]: that were being given.
[Guest]: So I can say that, you know, I've done some rough analysis, but roughly a third of the
[Guest]: loans went bad, because just bad business decisions, people had been overoptimistic.
[Guest]: And a third, of course, were frauds and cheats who ran away.
[Guest]: And the others got into trouble because of what used to be famously called then policy
[Guest]: paralysis, that you stepped out, you thought you'd get an environment clearance, you know,
[Guest]: and somehow in the system, environment clearances were supposed to be gotten by the private
[Guest]: contractor who was doing the project.
[Guest]: It wasn't that the government, within the government got those clearances, they thought,
[Guest]: oh, he let him bribe his way through.
[Guest]: So a third, roughly a third went bad because of those.
[Guest]: Now, this was a situation in say, 2010-11, when on top of this, you add retrospective
[Guest]: taxes, and a badly managed Ministry of Finance.
[Guest]: I was doing this NIPFPDA program that we've been doing, and it's a badly managed Ministry
[Guest]: of Finance under Pranab Mukherjee, honestly.
[Guest]: So put that all together, and you see that from 2011 onwards, investment starts declining.
[Guest]: There's a little bit of a blip in 2015.
[Guest]: So I expect that when Modi becomes Prime Minister, people start thinking that things will get
[Guest]: some of those problems will get solved.
[Guest]: But then that also, you know, goes away in about 16 or so, even before demonetization.
[Guest]: So demonetization doesn't actually have a great visible impact.
[Guest]: So I was one of the, you know, very outspoken opponents of demonetization.
[Guest]: But when I look back, I didn't see as much of an effect as I thought there might be.
[Guest]: But you know, be that as it may.
[Guest]: Investment didn't pick up again.
[Guest]: And we are, you know, I don't know where we will go in terms of, because the pandemic
[Guest]: is I guess the last straw in this, because the more the uncertainty, investment always
[Guest]: does badly under uncertainty.
[Guest]: So if it didn't pick up from 2011 onwards, then this is not a time when I would think
[Guest]: it's going to pick up very fast.
[Guest]: Things will take time to work out.
[Guest]: So that's the backstory I would add to Pooja's story.
[Amit Varma]: How much of a factor in investments picking up is a quantitative easing, for example,
[Amit Varma]: which happens out there, which happens in the US, for example, the easy money coming
[Amit Varma]: in, so to say, because there is some of that happening right now after this pandemic, and
[Amit Varma]: some of it will find its way into India.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, some of it is why the stock market has done much better than you would expect
[Amit Varma]: it to in these economic circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: So are certain aspects of how our economy does independent of our economy itself?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: They are, but I think it's also about what is our policy response.
[Guest]: So episodes such as the taper tantrum.
[Guest]: So in 2013, when Ben Bernanke was expected to, you know, when he spoke and people thought
[Guest]: that the Fed is going to start tightening right away, then money started flowing out
[Guest]: of emerging economies.
[Guest]: India's response was that we want to defend the rupee.
[Guest]: And to try to defend the rupee, you know, we had Chidambaram and finance secretary and
[Guest]: everybody just coming on TV every day, hiking up interest rates.
[Guest]: This was a big mistake.
[Guest]: I mean, the rupee kept slipping.
[Guest]: They couldn't stop that.
[Guest]: But they tightened monetary policy so much that, I mean, that's one thing that's really
[Guest]: hurt the system.
[Guest]: Because rates didn't go back down for a very long time.
[Guest]: And so they didn't reverse, almost for a year, they didn't reverse all the measures that
[Guest]: they had taken in the rupee defense of 2013, after the taper tantrum.
[Guest]: And so let's just look forward now, see US is arguably overheating, because they've given
[Guest]: a large fiscal stimulus and a large monetary stimulus.
[Guest]: And if they're overheating, and if they start seeing inflation and the Fed starts tightening,
[Guest]: then we could easily have again this risk on risk off situation where money goes out
[Guest]: of emerging economies.
[Guest]: The question would be what is going to be the policy response of the government and
[Guest]: the RBI, if they start trying to defend the rupee, if this happens.
[Guest]: So if it doesn't happen, fine.
[Guest]: If this happens and they start trying to defend the rupee, and for that they tighten liquidity,
[Guest]: raise interest rates, like they did in 2013, then whatever little chance we have of, you
[Guest]: know, somehow getting up and trying to walk, we lose that as well.
[Guest]: So the policy response, to a very large extent will determine the impact of what happens
[Guest]: in the US on us.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of questions.
[Amit Varma]: One is that it's kind of amusing to me how somehow in the popular narrative, the where
[Amit Varma]: the rupee was got tied up with nationalism, that if the rupee was strong, we would be
[Amit Varma]: proud and if the rupee was weak, we would be nahin yaar, woh dollar ko itna aage nahin
[Amit Varma]: jaane dene ka.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, how much of that is kind of a barrier and then if the if the popular sentiment
[Amit Varma]: becomes like this, and definitely a lot of Modi's campaigning pre 2014 was look what
[Amit Varma]: is happening to the rupee, and of course, forget what happened to it after he took over.
[Amit Varma]: How much of this then involves the actual policy response like does it even matter like
[Amit Varma]: shouldn't the rupee be wherever it is and we should simply not bother about it.
[Amit Varma]: That's what I would imagine.
[Amit Varma]: What's what's your take on that?
[Guest]: So if you look back, it's a very interesting story that in the early 2000s, there was this
[Guest]: huge attempt to prevent rupee appreciation.
[Guest]: You wanted a weak rupee and why was that?
[Guest]: Because the dominant lobby was the exporter lobby.
[Guest]: The exporters were all the time, you know, whatever their federations are, whoever the
[Guest]: exporters are, their industry lobbies, somehow, they always convince economists to say what
[Guest]: they want said, but there was a lot of this, don't let the rupee get strong, CEO opened
[Guest]: up capital flows, now capital is coming in, pushing the rupee up, making us uncompetitive,
[Guest]: try to prevent rupee appreciation.
[Guest]: And then RBI went on this major thing of trying to buy up rupees, preventing an appreciation.
[Guest]: And then sometime in January 2004, they ran out of government bonds to sterilize their
[Guest]: intervention because they were doing fully sterilized intervention because this was the
[Guest]: second episode.
[Unknown]: Remember, they hadn't done that in 96.
[Guest]: So now, why did the situation change?
[Guest]: In my opinion, the situation changed because once you allowed foreign borrowing, dollar
[Guest]: denominated borrowing, then the people who were borrowing in dollars had a lot of dollar
[Guest]: exposure.
[Guest]: So they don't want a weak rupee.
[Guest]: And in terms of the political influence and the, you know, cacophony, the everything,
[Guest]: the need for a strong rupee became more important than the need for a weak rupee.
[Guest]: The exporters had wanted a weak rupee, whereas the firms who have dollar denominated borrowings
[Guest]: on their balance sheets, they want a strong rupee.
[Guest]: So I don't think it's that much of nationalism.
[Guest]: Of course, you know, somebody might say this or that, but I think eventually, at least
[Guest]: what I see getting translated into policy and pressure for a certain kind of policy
[Guest]: is how is industry getting impacted by the movement of the rupee, because there's a lot
[Guest]: of exposure and that exposure, foreign currency exposure, which means that firms will get
[Guest]: hit when the rupee moves.
[Guest]: And this exposure is there because, you know, RBI is constantly intervening to try to prevent
[Guest]: rupee, they call it volatility, let me call it flexibility, as you've just called it.
[Guest]: They try to prevent the rupee from moving around too much.
[Guest]: So when they try to prevent it, people think, aha, I can take, now they'll take care.
[Guest]: So the rupee won't weaken too much or the rupee won't strengthen too much.
[Guest]: So you get a lot of foreign currency exposure.
[Guest]: This is part of the reason why you always have some sort of a pressure on RBI to do
[Amit Varma]: something or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And what's your recommended response to these kinds of pressures?
[Guest]: Because exactly as yours was, stay out of it, just stay out of it, let it go wherever.
[Guest]: And people will hedge their risks then.
[Guest]: Today, it's a moral hazard problem, are not hedging their risk because they come back
[Guest]: and scream at you, don't let the rupee this, don't let the rupee that, intervene, intervene,
[Guest]: intervene.
[Guest]: Oh, this has happened.
[Guest]: And then the RBI steps in and intervenes.
[Guest]: Whereas if you allow it to be volatile, to be flexible, people will hedge and you won't
[Guest]: get that kind of exposure, currency exposure.
[Amit Varma]: So one of your core causes, and before we get to the COVID economy and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: one of your core causes through all this time and something that you're known for and that
[Amit Varma]: mutual friends speak very highly of is your work on inflation targeting.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to kind of try and ask you to demystify it a bit.
[Amit Varma]: So first of all, I'll quickly kind of sum up what the role that monetary policy plays
[Amit Varma]: in terms of inflation.
[Amit Varma]: And you can correct me if I'm being too simplistic or if I mess up somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: But basically what happens is that the RBI controls, your central bank controls the flow
[Amit Varma]: of money into the economy.
[Amit Varma]: So they can lower interest rates, which would mean that there is effectively a greater flow
[Amit Varma]: And if the money supply goes up, but everything else remains the same, the prices of everything
[Amit Varma]: will rise.
[Amit Varma]: It's a supply and demand thing.
[Amit Varma]: And it's the opposite thing that if they tighten it, then, you know, there is less money out
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the price of everything might even go down or it'll affect the rate of inflation.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason for the political impetus for loosening interest rates would be that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in the short term, you get, you know, more money out there, there's more buoyancy,
[Amit Varma]: there's more spending.
[Amit Varma]: And that makes the economy kind of look better.
[Amit Varma]: So that is kind of one of the pressures that you sort of have to balance.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, one is this summation broadly correct in its necessarily simplistic way.
[Amit Varma]: And two, what then is inflation targeting?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there an ideal rate of inflation that we should have?
[Amit Varma]: What is the role of a central bank here?
[Amit Varma]: Can you then demystify all of this that why did this become such an important thing?
[Guest]: Yeah, so let's say that we have an economy that tries to target the exchange rate.
[Guest]: It doesn't care about inflation.
[Guest]: It targets the exchange rate.
[Guest]: It wants a stable rupee.
[Guest]: And as a consequence, we do what we did, let's say, what Bimal Jalan did in the Asian crisis,
[Guest]: that when there was pressure on the rupee to depreciate, he hiked up interest rates
[Guest]: by 200 basis point on 16th of January 1999 on one single day.
[Guest]: Similarly, we do what we did during the period of the Tipper Tantrum that we thought the
[Guest]: rupee is weak or will weaken.
[Guest]: So we hiked short-term rates, tighten liquidity.
[Guest]: What we're doing then is that let's assume that at that time, which is true in this case,
[Guest]: but let's assume at that time the economy is not doing very well.
[Guest]: Then what you end up doing is making it worse.
[Guest]: Because the economy was already weak and because of that, perhaps, you know, you got this pressure
[Guest]: on the rupee.
[Guest]: Now, we were repeatedly seeing episodes of that happen, that, you know, the economy needed
[Guest]: something.
[Guest]: Okay, so your business cycle conditions were such that we needed an accommodative or lose
[Guest]: monetary policy.
[Guest]: But what happened instead was that because you were trying to defend the rupee, you went
[Guest]: and hiked rates.
[Guest]: What that does is actually makes your policy pro-cyclical.
[Guest]: You were already going down and it makes you go down further.
[Amit Varma]: Because there's less spending and so on.
[Guest]: Because of what you described just now that when interest rates are higher, so you've
[Guest]: hiked rates to defend the rupee, right?
[Guest]: But when rates are higher, people borrow less, people spend less, you know.
[Guest]: So that's why rates get raised when inflation goes up or when, as we just talked about,
[Guest]: the US economy overheating.
[Guest]: So when it is overheating, the Fed may raise interest rates.
[Guest]: So when there's too much demand in the economy, you try to bring it down.
[Guest]: So we were seeing a lot of that happen.
[Guest]: So in the Indian context, why did inflation targeting make sense?
[Guest]: And why did the government go ahead with it?
[Guest]: It's not because, you know, some of us write about things, we write about many things.
[Guest]: But why it made sense was that repeatedly there were these episodes when you were doing
[Guest]: something which was actually bad for the wider economy as a whole.
[Guest]: So while it might have given you rupee stabilization.
[Guest]: So that was the choice.
[Guest]: The third choice, which would have been to close the capital account, we don't have that
[Guest]: choice anymore.
[Guest]: So we are such a global economy.
[Guest]: And anyway, even if we try to close some accounts, money finds a way to move around.
[Guest]: So we don't want to go there.
[Guest]: Though sometimes, you know, they do try to impose some capital controls, gold, this,
[Guest]: that and the other.
[Guest]: That tendency is very much there.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: But as you said earlier, the mindset of trying to control is very much there.
[Guest]: But let's just say that, you know, we put that aside because that's not going to solve
[Guest]: your problem.
[Guest]: So then you have a choice between these two things, between trying to stabilize the currency,
[Guest]: which could be pro cyclical, if your economy is on a decline and your hiking rates, you're
[Guest]: just doing the wrong thing.
[Guest]: And the other is that you respond to the business cycle conditions in the economy.
[Guest]: So while we say inflation targeting, but actually inflation doesn't happen on some island on
[Guest]: its own.
[Guest]: Inflation is happening when there is excess demand in the economy.
[Guest]: And that is happening when the economy is on upswing.
[Guest]: So what you're really trying to do is to stabilize the business cycle.
[Guest]: You're trying to do counter cyclical monetary policy.
[Guest]: That's the essence of why inflation targeting makes sense.
[Amit Varma]: So now a further question, because from the term, it would seem that there is an optimal
[Amit Varma]: rate of inflation you have to maintain.
[Amit Varma]: So is there an optimal rate of inflation?
[Amit Varma]: And why is it optimal?
[Amit Varma]: And how does one arrive at it?
[Amit Varma]: And so on.
[Guest]: Broader question.
[Guest]: So I think Raghu was the governor at that time.
[Guest]: And this one was chosen as 2% above the inflation target in advanced economies.
[Guest]: So advanced economies have roughly 2% and you want a positive inflation rate because
[Guest]: you want relative prices to be able to move and you can't really have disinflation.
[Guest]: So that's painful for too many people.
[Guest]: So the advanced economies have chosen 2%.
[Guest]: Now if you kind of think, Bilasa Samuelson, that you're getting a productivity improvement
[Guest]: because you're an emerging economy, so you can have an inflation, you want to choose
[Guest]: your target, your productivity improvement at a long term average rate of 2%.
[Guest]: So your currency could kind of stay where it is roughly stable.
[Guest]: You choose an inflation rate of 2% above the inflation target of advanced economies.
[Guest]: So that's where that number came from.
[Guest]: But the second number, which is our own number, is this 2 to 6.
[Guest]: The 2 to 6 is the band around the 4% target.
[Guest]: And that's really because one, inflation targeting was something so new and very few people really
[Guest]: understood whether you'll actually be able to get to 4% inflation by moving around interest
[Guest]: rates.
[Guest]: And second, because monetary policy transmission is very, very weak.
[Guest]: You don't have competitive, well-functioning bond markets and banks that would actually
[Guest]: do this transmission.
[Guest]: So in the absence of a well-functioning monetary policy transmission, you don't want a very
[Guest]: tight target because then you would have to hike rates around, you have to jack them around
[Guest]: up and down depending on the inflation.
[Guest]: So what you want to do is get a bit of flexibility there.
[Amit Varma]: Makes sense.
[Amit Varma]: Let's now come to the current time.
[Amit Varma]: Before COVID struck, let's say maybe February last year, before COVID struck, if you were
[Amit Varma]: to sort of talk about the state of the economy then, you know, not just in a static way,
[Amit Varma]: but as you know, part of different trends that have been playing out, how would you
[Amit Varma]: then sort of sum that up?
[Amit Varma]: Like for example, I've done episodes on the credit crisis with Arvind, Viral, various
[Amit Varma]: people.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what was the state of that?
[Amit Varma]: What was the state of our economy generally?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what did it look like before COVID struck?
[Amit Varma]: Because I think it's important also to kind of think about that before we get down to
[Amit Varma]: talking about the impact of COVID, like I'd done an episode with Vivek Kaul on the Indian
[Amit Varma]: economy in 2019.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember, you know, everything we had to say was extremely bleak anyway.
[Amit Varma]: It feels like, you know, things were just going downhill, things look pretty bad.
[Amit Varma]: What was your sense of it at the time?
[Guest]: I was worrying about two things.
[Guest]: I was worrying about the fact that investment had still not picked up.
[Guest]: And second, about the non-performing assets in the banking system.
[Guest]: And that basically, I thought that this was a time when we should start moving towards
[Guest]: privatization of public sector banks.
[Guest]: And you know, some of the stuff I was writing was that unless we move away from this public
[Guest]: sector banking setup that we somehow seem to be stuck with, we will actually not be
[Guest]: able to recover.
[Guest]: Third, that we have not done the financial sector reforms that are needed for us to be
[Guest]: able to get back on track.
[Guest]: You know, so the kind of things that need to be done are, one, a competitive banking
[Guest]: system, which for me means either you reduce your shareholdership or you give a lot of
[Guest]: private sector bank licenses.
[Guest]: So that also brings competition.
[Guest]: And you know, the telecom model or the aviation model where you don't, you know, you don't
[Guest]: want to privatize them for whatever reason.
[Guest]: The unions will make trouble or then give more licenses, but at least bring competition
[Guest]: into the sector.
[Guest]: So I thought that was a difficult enough agenda.
[Guest]: But I mean, that was mainly the investment, credit, the shape of the banking sector were
[Amit Varma]: what were worrying me.
[Amit Varma]: You know, on a tangent, since we are reaching COVID, I came across this interesting paper
[Amit Varma]: you wrote with Supriya Krishnan called Health and Disaster Risk Management in India, which
[Amit Varma]: was published in February 2020, last year before the pandemic struck, where you're doing
[Amit Varma]: various things, you're assessing our public health infrastructure and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: So to what extent, and you also talk about communicable diseases in it and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So to what extent did, like, were there any new revelations or did things play out kind
[Amit Varma]: of the way you expected that we were nowhere close to being prepared?
[Guest]: I think even if we had been optimally prepared, according to whatever we were measuring in
[Guest]: that paper, we would still have been unprepared because, you know, I don't think anybody can
[Guest]: be prepared for this magnitude of so many people falling ill.
[Guest]: You know, you're not going to ever have so many doctors and so many people, so many nurses
[Guest]: and so many hospitals, because otherwise they'll be unprofitable and lying vacant for decades,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So some arrangements, you don't have arrangements for a tenfold increase in oxygen demand.
[Guest]: You don't have arrangements for this.
[Guest]: So I mean, that was taking into a, you know, just assuming a normal, not a pandemic like
[Guest]: this, but we couldn't have been prepared.
[Guest]: At least I felt that even if we'd done everything we could, we couldn't have been prepared for
[Guest]: this kind of magnitude of the crisis, health crisis.
[Amit Varma]: And given what we know in hindsight about how it was handled, assume that we use that
[Amit Varma]: knowledge and we can go back in a time machine and do everything right, right?
[Amit Varma]: So we end up with the best case scenario.
[Amit Varma]: What do you think that would have been?
[Guest]: I mean, we would have tested more, if we could have tested more, we could have, we would
[Guest]: have done local lockdowns more because we didn't understand what the full implication
[Guest]: of a national lockdown would be, we would have pre-ordered vaccines when they started,
[Guest]: when people started working on vaccines, not even when they did trial, phase one trials,
[Guest]: but, you know, we would have pre-ordered vaccines and, you know, prepared hospitals so that
[Guest]: in case that we still get the disease, but you know, all this is with the benefit of
[Guest]: hindsight.
[Guest]: I must admit that neither I, nor any of the big critics that I hear talk about this, were
[Guest]: writing that, how much pre-ordering of vaccines have you done?
[Guest]: On the contrary, one heard people say, oh, Covaxin is not tested, why are you allowing
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: And why are you buying it?
[Guest]: So with the benefit of hindsight, one can say a lot of things, but if I were to be honest
[Guest]: and say that would I have figured out all this, then I don't think I would have figured
[Guest]: out all this then.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, there's this really nice quote I came across where someone said that
[Amit Varma]: if you act optimally, then before a pandemic, it will always seem like you are doing too
[Amit Varma]: much.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's what it will seem like before.
[Amit Varma]: And after a pandemic, it will always seem like you did too little.
[Amit Varma]: It's just, you know, we are kind of in this very tough spot, but looking at the pandemic
[Amit Varma]: as it kind of proceeded, I mean, obviously there are disasters at various levels like
[Amit Varma]: the humanitarian disaster, and let's not even go into that.
[Amit Varma]: But as an economist, when you're thinking of what is the economic impact of this, number
[Amit Varma]: one, and number two, when you're thinking of what can we do to ameliorate it with whatever
[Amit Varma]: limited resources we have, then tell me a little bit about what that kind of thinking
[Amit Varma]: is like, like what kind of data gives you the fullest possible picture of this?
[Amit Varma]: It appears to me that, you know, when the first lockdown happened, all the migrant labor
[Amit Varma]: is going back.
[Amit Varma]: You don't know what the sentiment is, you don't know how many of them are coming back.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe there is some MNREGS data, which suddenly shows a spike, and you know that all these
[Amit Varma]: people have come back from the cities, there's no work and blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But you don't know the longer term sentiment and how it's going to play out when all these
[Amit Varma]: people die.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, what we are seeing today is that deaths are massively underreported.
[Amit Varma]: You don't know how those deaths will affect things going forward.
[Amit Varma]: So many things we don't know.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you begin to make sense of what is going wrong?
[Amit Varma]: And then how do you begin to make sense of what to do about it?
[Guest]: Looking at CMI household survey data, the surveys are still continuing, does give you
[Guest]: some sense.
[Guest]: So they talk about, they ask you, are you looking for a job?
[Guest]: So that's labor force participation.
[Guest]: They ask you, are you employed?
[Guest]: So that's the employment rate.
[Guest]: They also ask you how many members of the family there are.
[Guest]: So if there are some missing, which were there, so it's the same set of households, same set
[Guest]: of, I think, 200,000 plus households that are interviewed three times a year.
[Guest]: So you can make out, because it's the same household and you're going back to the household,
[Guest]: so you can get some idea of the missing people there, or you also get data on expenditure
[Guest]: that will tell you whether people are, so if they're eating less or spending less on
[Guest]: what are they spending less.
[Guest]: So the items on which they spend have been changing.
[Guest]: And so that's something that some of us do look at.
[Guest]: And of course, things are bad.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't, the data is reflecting whatever that people have lost their jobs and many
[Guest]: are dropping out of the labor force, but then that is something that one would expect.
[Guest]: So that, you know, if that answers the data question, the question on what would you do?
[Guest]: I mean, other than vaccinating and trying to do COVID appropriate behavior and not doing
[Guest]: the non-essential things that would hurt everyone, I'm not sure what else we can do.
[Guest]: I think the way out is to vaccinate, to have COVID appropriate behavior, to let people
[Guest]: come back to work when you feel that it's safe, and by now people are scared enough.
[Guest]: So people who used to be, you know, I mean, out of the people who we've lost among friends
[Guest]: and family, a lot of them were refusing to take the vaccine, but today their families
[Guest]: are queuing up for vaccines.
[Guest]: So that vaccine, that hesitancy, the resistance to vaccine has gone away, at least, I mean,
[Guest]: I don't have data on that, but the demand for vaccines has increased.
[Guest]: So the gap may actually increase because as this spreads, till the supply comes back.
[Guest]: So I think that's what you can do.
[Guest]: So that at least people can come back to economic activity.
[Guest]: You have to allow them to come back and the economy will, I think, you know, people who
[Guest]: either had COVID or had a vaccine will be able to get back to work pretty soon.
[Guest]: I mean, those who are not, you know, suffering from some of the ill effects other than that,
[Guest]: many will be, most will be able to come back to work pretty soon.
[Amit Varma]: And in terms of economic policy at the government level, is there something special that the
[Amit Varma]: government can do that one would not recommend that it does otherwise?
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, people speak about put a special stimulus out there or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: you know, fiscal policy, monetary policy.
[Amit Varma]: What is your sense of what can and should be done there?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there something that should be done now that would not otherwise have been necessary
[Guest]: in normal times?
[Guest]: So maybe you can cut taxes and borrow.
[Guest]: You can cut import duties that might boost your exports.
[Guest]: You can cut taxes so whoever's having to pay an 18% GST on something gets a relief.
[Guest]: And the government, I'm not saying it can borrow too much because, you know, it doesn't
[Guest]: have much fiscal space.
[Guest]: But to some extent, this is the way to provide relief, rather than to try to find who all
[Guest]: to pay to.
[Guest]: I would just say cutting taxes gives everybody relief across the board.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, in fact, I saw this very interesting Elonomics episode of yours where you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about the absurdity of cutting the personal income tax while raising GST.
[Amit Varma]: And you're like, whatever, you know, it doesn't, it's not kind of remotely coherent.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the idea of cutting taxes is you leave the money in the hands of the people,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which leads me to sort of this interesting question about how so and this is again a
[Amit Varma]: sort of a mindset question where so many people in government will often behave as if one
[Amit Varma]: of the aims or one of the metrics of a healthy economy is how much your tax collections have
[Amit Varma]: gone up.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not sure that's such a great metric because, you know, that tells you something
[Amit Varma]: about the health of the state and the state is, of course, a predatory state.
[Amit Varma]: So do you really want it to be healthy?
[Amit Varma]: You know, while your focus should be on the health of society.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that you have thoughts on?
[Guest]: Sometimes I wonder, when I look at bureaucrats, I wonder that is the way to increase the tax
[Guest]: GDP ratio done through reducing the denominator?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, they don't care, they don't care, they don't care that you impose taxes that
[Guest]: are actually going to reduce investment.
[Guest]: So you do some retrospective tax, right, you'll get some X crore rupees.
[Guest]: But you end up reducing investment, you end up reducing GDP.
[Guest]: And that's how your, you know, tax to GDP ratio may look better.
[Guest]: But I mean, I'm kidding, I'm, you know, this is the...
[Unknown]: You know, you're kidding, but you're not really kidding.
[Guest]: I mean, basically, they don't care.
[Guest]: I think what's happened is that the tax administration is in charge of tax policy.
[Guest]: On a more serious note, that separation is essential.
[Guest]: Because the job of tax administration is given what we have, we have to, you know, collect
[Guest]: taxes without too much cost, and there has to be improved compliance and so on.
[Guest]: But the role of tax policy is to make taxes such that we improve output, we improve productivity,
[Guest]: we don't put, you know, deadweight loss on the economy, we don't put extra burden on the economy.
[Guest]: Because we don't have much tax policy thinking outside of tax administration.
[Guest]: I think that the way tax policy gets made in India, it's blind to the impact on GDP.
[Guest]: We started this conversation talking about, you know, retrospective taxes, your interview
[Guest]: with Pooja, and how that actually turned the economy around, we are 10 years later, maybe
[Guest]: a little more than 10 years later, we are still suffering the impact of trying to collect
[Guest]: just this much of more of taxes.
[Guest]: So I have very strong views on that.
[Amit Varma]: But that's kind of...
[Amit Varma]: No, like you said, it's completely nuts that the tax administration people should have
[Amit Varma]: so much influence on tax policy, because obviously, they'll want more money to spend, who kind
[Amit Varma]: of wouldn't.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll bring you into another issue you've written about, you know, a couple of episodes
[Amit Varma]: ago, I had Karthik Mulyadharan on my show, The Economist, and we were talking health
[Amit Varma]: care policy.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the digressions we took was the petrol taxes.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, the high petrol taxes are a bad thing, because they affect the common person,
[Amit Varma]: inflationary effect, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And he was defending it from a public finance point of view, saying that if the government
[Amit Varma]: collects taxes, that's how I would like them to collect it.
[Amit Varma]: What's your view on this?
[Guest]: So I'm very conflicted.
[Guest]: On the one hand, I think, you know, it's a carbon tax, it reduces your consumption of,
[Guest]: you know, carbon fuels.
[Guest]: And so, in one sense, I think that, you know, I should not be saying anything.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, I feel that in the period when oil prices were declining, the
[Guest]: FISC became too dependent on these taxes.
[Guest]: And you know, today, you're paying so much more taxes than the actual fuel, it hurts.
[Guest]: And today, the FISC cannot do away with these taxes, because they've become too dependent
[Guest]: on them.
[Guest]: And in that perspective, as you know, an economist, I would say that I don't think this is good
[Guest]: public finance when you're too dependent on any one kind of tax on this, apart from everything
[Guest]: that you have said.
[Guest]: So but you know, because it's a carbon tax, I'm a little conflicted.
[Guest]: If this was on gold, I might say something else.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no.
[Amit Varma]: And just to kind of give perspective to those listeners, you know, after 2014, Modi got
[Amit Varma]: this massive bonanza when oil prices, global oil prices went down.
[Amit Varma]: And he could have chosen to let petrol prices in India come down.
[Amit Varma]: And that benefit would have been passed on to people, not just people who drive cars,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, but petrol prices affect everything, everything would have become cheaper.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, they just raise the taxes.
[Amit Varma]: So it seemed to the common person that okay, petrol prices haven't really gone up.
[Amit Varma]: But we were just you know, the tax became a larger percentage of that.
[Amit Varma]: And now the taxes only go up, they don't go down.
[Amit Varma]: So that's something to think about.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link to an article you wrote on this.
[Amit Varma]: So to be honest, right, when I asked you, I did know that you would kind of come out
[Amit Varma]: on my side on this, I will send that link to Karthik.
[Amit Varma]: So a final big question before we end up by talking about the COVID scenario also, you
[Amit Varma]: know, when we kind of look at the Indian economy, like whenever I talk about problems in India,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's in agriculture, in whatever, within that bigger problem, there is a subset
[Amit Varma]: that is even worse, which is the role of women in it, right.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd done an episode with Namita Bhandare on the women's participation in the labor
[Amit Varma]: force, where she pointed out that it's actually gone down over the last sort of decade and
[Amit Varma]: a half that there are less women in percentage terms working today than was the case.
[Amit Varma]: And even before COVID, you would expect the opposite to be the case, because the economy
[Amit Varma]: has been growing, everything is fine.
[Amit Varma]: Why are less women working?
[Amit Varma]: And it also seems to me that there's a massive loss there, the fact that of course, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: some of it is cultural issues, that, you know, we have this very misogynistic backward view
[Amit Varma]: of women that a woman's places in the kitchen and blah, blah, blah, and some of those are
[Amit Varma]: cultural issues.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a massive loss in terms of, you know, just productivity, human capital, all
[Amit Varma]: of that, the fact that half our people are almost, you know, treated differently.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, given this kind of inferior status, and therefore inferior opportunities.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of that?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there any way to kind of quantify, say, whether it's the unpaid labor of women
[Amit Varma]: or quantify the opportunity cost that what if, you know, women were getting the same
[Amit Varma]: kind of opportunities?
[Amit Varma]: And also, when you look at the general drift, what is the tendency?
[Amit Varma]: Is there reason to hope in this in this regard?
[Guest]: So I think one of the big factors is the economy, that when employment doesn't grow fast enough,
[Guest]: then within a family, it is the male who takes up a job rather than the female.
[Guest]: So if one of them is going to be able to go out and work, then who goes out to work?
[Guest]: So she does the childcare, she does the homework, and the male goes out to work.
[Guest]: So the, you know, aggregate rate of growth of jobs, if that slows down, it is going to,
[Guest]: in my opinion, it also impacts how many women go out to work.
[Guest]: The second thing that has been happening here, so there have, you know, this is an issue
[Guest]: that has been studied by quite a few people.
[Guest]: The second thing that seems to be happening here is that as the family income goes up
[Guest]: because the male earns more, then the woman actually stays at home because she's able
[Guest]: to give her children childcare, which she cannot afford if the male earns less.
[Guest]: And this is a paradoxical situation where it's not very easy to say, what would you
[Guest]: want?
[Guest]: Do you want him to earn less?
[Guest]: No, you don't.
[Guest]: You want him to earn more and her to be able to go out, but are there good facilities for
[Guest]: childcare?
[Guest]: No, there aren't.
[Guest]: So, you know, you find that women usually are the ones who would say they would stay
[Guest]: back even though they could have got a job.
[Guest]: The first is clearly a bad, the second is a paradoxical one.
[Guest]: And I think the third is that women migrate.
[Guest]: So when married women migrate a lot.
[Guest]: So when you look at migration data, a lot of migration is happening because the woman
[Guest]: goes and, you know, goes to the village where her husband and his family live.
[Guest]: And there it is not very easy for her to find a job.
[Guest]: I mean, you don't have these thriving labor markets.
[Guest]: Of course, then also they try to, some of them get jobs.
[Guest]: I'm not saying it's zero.
[Guest]: But both society, you know, the society is very conservative, a young bride in a village
[Guest]: is not expected to come and start working if they can afford to have her stay at home
[Guest]: and look after her kids.
[Guest]: So it's both cultural, it is the economy.
[Guest]: And then, of course, it is skill development that if the man starts earning more, then
[Guest]: and he becomes more skilled, even if she's also skilled, if they both get skilled.
[Guest]: But if the household income allows her to look after the children, then she does that.
[Guest]: So it's a combination.
[Guest]: I think it's a very complex issue.
[Guest]: It's not an easy one for us to solve looking ahead.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I done this episode with Chinmay Tumbay on his great book, India Moving, about migration
[Amit Varma]: in and outside India.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the great TIL moments for me there was when he said that the largest cause of
[Amit Varma]: internal migration within the country is just women getting married and going to their husband's
[Amit Varma]: home, which is something to my shame.
[Amit Varma]: I had never even thought about it in those terms, but suddenly it just becomes so stark.
[Amit Varma]: And Namita had, of course, also mentioned that this happens that as the men start earning
[Amit Varma]: more, the women kind of drop out because they can actually afford to stay at home.
[Amit Varma]: And I would therefore imagine that when the men start earning so much more, that the women
[Amit Varma]: don't have to drop out, that they can also work and find satisfaction elsewhere that
[Amit Varma]: maybe then that rate goes up.
[Amit Varma]: So is it then like a kind of a reverse bell curve there in terms of women's participation?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think, is there any data from anywhere in the world which gives us a clue?
[Guest]: So I don't particularly do women's studies, I am a macroeconomist.
[Guest]: I don't know whether there's data elsewhere in the world, but I think we'll be a long
[Guest]: way from that.
[Guest]: I mean, there will be sections of society which will start moving, but how that affects
[Guest]: the aggregate.
[Guest]: It might be that we see lower reduced labor force participation of women for a long time.
[Guest]: And particularly given the schools and the way they are, given the childcare facilities
[Guest]: the way they are, it's very hard for a woman to leave her children anywhere and go off
[Guest]: for a whole day.
[Guest]: I mean, maybe work from home helps, maybe it's going to put double burden on her, but
[Guest]: still she'll be able to work.
[Guest]: And if she doesn't have to leave her children and go, I think it's a very difficult issue.
[Guest]: In fact, around the world you see that.
[Guest]: So if you look at Switzerland, for example, I read a paper which was talking about how
[Guest]: one member of the family works, because a lot of studies are showing that when children
[Guest]: are brought up by their parents, by them, you know, mother or father, and they are spoken
[Guest]: to, they become more intelligent, they become better human beings.
[Guest]: So instead of leaving children in creches where it's rather impersonal, as a society,
[Guest]: I think her contribution today, whether we measure it in income, whether we measure it
[Guest]: in GDP, but she's making a very big contribution when she's looking after her own children.
[Guest]: So I'm not sure where we will go on this.
[Guest]: So if we jump stages and go the way some advanced economies are going, we could well be saying
[Guest]: that either parent, when both are getting skilled, for example, it's not necessarily
[Guest]: that the man has to go out and work, but he could be the one who could be looking after
[Guest]: the children.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of jumping stages, I think the first imperative for the Indian economy would
[Amit Varma]: be to get back to where it was before COVID kind of did what it did.
[Amit Varma]: So I have three final questions for you.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is about economics, but the last two are not.
[Amit Varma]: And so here's the economics one, that, you know, just looking at where we are today,
[Amit Varma]: looking at the fact that the second wave is still kind of going on, that is devastating
[Amit Varma]: rural India.
[Amit Varma]: We don't know what the end game is.
[Amit Varma]: We don't know if there'll be more variants or whatever, when we look forward to the job
[Amit Varma]: that the Indian economy has to do to get back on track, you know, what are the things which
[Amit Varma]: for you are reasons to be hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the things which for you are reasons to despair?
[Guest]: So I'm hopeful that now that we've allowed, we're not stopping people from getting the
[Guest]: vaccine, whether it's individuals, private hospitals, companies, wherever, there will
[Guest]: be a lot of energy that will be devoted to solving this issue, we'll get better at it.
[Guest]: So I'm hoping that once one is able to get them and those negotiations will also work.
[Guest]: So I'm hoping that even if things will get a little worse now, but that they will get
[Guest]: better soon.
[Guest]: So that certainly makes me optimistic.
[Guest]: But in terms of how soon, what worries me is how soon will we be able to get back on
[Guest]: track?
[Guest]: How soon will the companies who, you know, eventually we give them a moratorium, but
[Guest]: moratoriums can't continue forever after all, banks are paying interest to us, to those
[Guest]: who have deposited money, to depositors.
[Guest]: So moratoriums will go away, people will have to pay back their loans, many loans will,
[Guest]: many companies have, you know, small businesses anyway, don't get too much.
[Guest]: But when they, whatever they have, this has been a very, very bad time for small companies.
[Guest]: So how many people will be able to get back on their feet, find work, find income, make,
[Guest]: you know, make some money, be able to sustain themselves?
[Guest]: That worries me.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So the penultimate question now, and I'll take you back to the young 19 year old Ila,
[Amit Varma]: who's standing up and saying, no, we need roads.
[Amit Varma]: If you were to, with all this life experience and hindsight, if you were to speak to that
[Amit Varma]: young girl for a moment and give her some advice or tell her things she may not know
[Amit Varma]: yet, but which would be useful for her to know in advance, what would you say?
[Guest]: What advice would you give her?
[Guest]: India is a very, very complex, very, very complex nation.
[Guest]: Don't spend your initial years only studying economics.
[Guest]: Study a lot more, study more subjects, study sociology, politics, history, and you'll do
[Guest]: the same things better and make less mistakes.
[Guest]: So do you wish you'd done all of those things?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: And now the final question, it's kind of a meme on the show that my guests have to recommend
[Amit Varma]: books which have either sort of changed the way they look at the world or influence them
[Amit Varma]: greatly or even something they've read recently and they want to share with everyone.
[Amit Varma]: These don't necessarily have to be books on your subject or economics or whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: just what are the most memorable books for you which have had an impact on you or that
[Amit Varma]: you would want to share just out of the sheer joy of reading them?
[Guest]: So Seeing Like a State would be something that I'd like to, yeah, by James Scott is
[Guest]: something that I'd like to share.
[Guest]: There are books that I've read over the years that the books in themselves were not like
[Guest]: very, very brilliant, but putting them all, they add up to a whole worldview, you know,
[Guest]: so whether you read Milton Friedman or whether you read what PJ Roark, however you pronounce
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So, you know, they all helped in helping me think, of course, the most recent book by
[Amit Varma]: Kilkaran Shah is my latest, is our latest favorite.
[Guest]: So with that, I guess that's the latest.
[Amit Varma]: All right.
[Amit Varma]: Ela, thank you so much for your time and your insights.
[Amit Varma]: I really appreciate that.
[Amit Varma]: Take care.
[Amit Varma]: Take care, Amit.
[Guest]: Bye-bye.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes, lots of rabbit holes
[Amit Varma]: for you to dive into, including links to Ela's work and previous episodes I've done on the
[Amit Varma]: economy.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Ela on Twitter at Ela Patnaik, one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.